CHAPTER 1
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF BODY SYSTEMS
Michael D. Roberts, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of N. Travis Triplett,
Duncan French, Ann Swank, Carwyn P.M. Sharp, Robert T. Harris, and Gary R. Hunter to
this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
describe both the macrostructure and microstructure of muscle
and bone;
describe the sliding-filament theory of muscular contraction;
describe the specific morphological and physiological
characteristics of different muscle fiber types and predict their
relative involvement in different sport events;
describe the anatomical and physiological characteristics of the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems; and
predict the cardiorespiratory responses to different types of
exercise or sports events.
Physical exercise and sport performance involve effective, purposeful
movements of the body. These movements result from the forces
developed in muscles, which move the various body parts by acting
through lever systems of the skeleton. Skeletal muscle activation
38

initiates in upper motor neurons located in the cerebral cortex, and
activation signals are relayed to lower motor neurons residing in the
spinal cord that are part of the peripheral nervous system. Support
for this neuromuscular activity involves continuous delivery of
oxygen and nutrients to working tissues and removal of carbon
dioxide and metabolic waste by-products from working tissues
through activities of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
In order to best apply the available scientific knowledge to the
training of athletes and the development of effective training
programs, strength and conditioning professionals must have a basic
understanding of not only musculoskeletal function but also those
systems of the body that directly support the work of exercising
muscle. Accordingly, this chapter summarizes those aspects of the
anatomy and function of the musculoskeletal, neuromuscular,
cardiovascular, and respiratory systems that are essential for
developing and maintaining muscular force and power.
39

Musculoskeletal System
The musculoskeletal system of the human body consists of bones,
joints, muscles, and tendons configured to allow the great variety of
movements characteristic of human activity. This section describes
the various components of the musculoskeletal system, both
individually and in the context of how they function together.
Skeleton
The muscles of the body function by pulling against bones that
rotate about joints. Muscles can only pull, not push, given that the
activation of muscles results in shortening contractions. However,
through the system of bony levers, muscle contractions can be
manifested as either pulling or pushing forces against external
objects.
The body has approximately 206 bones, though the number can
vary. This relatively light, strong structure provides leverage,
support, and protection to internal organs (figure 1.1). The axial
skeleton consists of the skull (cranium), vertebral column (vertebra
C1 through the coccyx), ribs, and sternum. The appendicular
skeleton includes the shoulder (or pectoral) girdle (left and right
scapula and clavicle); bones of the arms, wrists, and hands (left and
right humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges);
the pelvic girdle (left and right coxal or innominate bones); and the
bones of the legs, ankles, and feet (left and right femur, patella,
tibia, fibula, tarsals, metatarsals, and phalanges).
Junctions of bones are called joints. Fibrous joints (e.g., sutures
of the skull) allow virtually no movement, cartilaginous joints
(e.g., intervertebral disks) allow limited movement, and synovial
joints (e.g., elbow and knee) allow considerable movement.
Movements in relation to sports and exercise mainly occur at
synovial joints, whose most important features are low friction and
large range of motion. Articulating bone ends are covered with
smooth hyaline cartilage, and the entire joint is enclosed in a
40

capsule filled with synovial fluid. Additional supporting structures
of ligament and cartilage usually exist (41).
FIGURE 1.1 (a) Front view and (b) rear view of an adult male human skeleton.
41

What Factors Affect Skeletal Growth in an
Adult?
Aside from genetics, dietary habits and physical activity patterns affect the adult
skeleton. Several research studies have supported resistance training as yielding
positive bone adaptations. Hence, consistently lifting heavy loads during job tasks
or via resistance training increases bone density and bone mineral content.
Consistently performing more explosive movements with impact facilitates similar
adaptations. Some of the highest bone densities have been observed in people
who engage in gymnastics or other activities that involve high-strength, high-
power, or high-impact movements (29). Since bone adaptations occur less rapidly
compared to skeletal muscle, the consistent implementation of progressive
overload is important to facilitate positive adaptations.
Virtually all joint movements consist of a rotation about points or
axes. Joints can be categorized by the number of directions about
which rotation can occur. Uniaxial joints, such as the elbow,
operate as hinges, essentially rotating about only one axis. The knee
is often referred to as a hinge joint, but its axis of rotation actually
changes throughout the joint range of motion. Biaxial joints, such
as the ankle and wrist, allow movement about two perpendicular
axes. Multiaxial joints, including the shoulder and hip ball-and-
socket joints, allow movement about all three perpendicular axes
that define space.
The vertebral column is made up of vertebral bones separated
by flexible disks that allow movement to occur. The vertebrae are
grouped into 7 cervical vertebrae in the neck region; 12 thoracic
vertebrae in the middle to upper back; 5 lumbar vertebrae in the
lower back; 5 sacral vertebrae, which are fused together and make
up the rear part of the pelvis; and 3 to 5 coccygeal vertebrae, which
form a kind of vestigial internal tail extending downward from the
pelvis.
42

Skeletal Musculature
The system of muscles that enables the skeleton to move is depicted
in figure 1.2. The connection point between bones is the joint, and
skeletal muscles are attached to bones at each of their ends.
Without this arrangement, movement could not occur.
Musculoskeletal Macrostructure and Microstructure
Each skeletal muscle contains muscle tissue made up of a variety of
cell types (with the most notable being muscle fibers), connective
tissue, nerves, blood vessels, and a plethora of cell types between
muscle fibers that serve different functions. Fibrous connective
tissue, or epimysium, covers the body’s more than 430 skeletal
muscles. The epimysium is contiguous with the tendons at the ends
of the muscle (figure 1.3). The tendon is attached to bone
periosteum, a specialized connective tissue covering all bones.
Notably, muscle contractions pull on tendons, and in turn, this moves
bones that are attached to the associated tendons. Limb muscles
have two attachments to bone, including proximal (closer to the
trunk) and distal (farther from the trunk) attachments. The two
attachments of trunk muscles are termed superior (closer to the
head) and inferior (closer to the feet).
Muscle cells, often called muscle fibers or myofibers, are long
(sometimes running the entire length of a muscle), cylindrical cells
50 to 100 μm in diameter (about the diameter of a human hair).
Muscle fibers have all their nuclei situated on the outer periphery of
the cell and have a striated appearance when viewed with a
microscope under low magnification. Under the epimysium the
muscle fibers are grouped in bundles (fasciculi) that may consist of
up to 150 fibers, with the bundles surrounded by connective tissue
called perimysium. Each muscle fiber is surrounded by connective
tissue called endomysium, which is encircled by and is contiguous
with the muscle fiber membrane, or sarcolemma (41). All the
connective tissue—epimysium, perimysium, and endomysium—is
contiguous with the tendon, so tension developed in a muscle cell is
43

transmitted to the tendon and the bone to which it is attached
(figure 1.3).
The junction between a motor neuron (nerve cell) and the
muscle fibers it innervates is called the motor end plate, or, more
often, the neuromuscular junction (figure 1.4). Each muscle cell
has only one neuromuscular junction, although a single motor
neuron innervates many muscle fibers, sometimes hundreds or even
thousands. A motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates are
called a motor unit. All the muscle fibers of a motor unit contract
together when they are stimulated by the motor neuron.
The interior structure of a muscle fiber is depicted in figure 1.5.
The sarcoplasm, which is the cytoplasm of a muscle fiber, is an
aqueous medium through which the exchange of ions (sodium,
potassium, 
calcium) 
and 
metabolites 
(ADP, 
ATP, 
inorganic
phosphate) occur to and from different organelles. Not only is the
sarcoplasm of critical importance to muscle fibers because of this
role, but intracellular organelles and structures are also suspended in
the sarcoplasm. These organelles and structures include the
contractile apparatus constructed of thick and thin protein filaments,
other proteins including metabolic enzymes and signaling proteins,
stored glycogen and fat particles, ribosomes that facilitate protein
synthesis, and specialized organelles such as mitochondria and the
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
44

FIGURE 1.2 (a) Front view and (b) rear view of adult male human skeletal musculature.
45

FIGURE 1.3 Schematic drawing of a muscle illustrating three types of connective tissue:
epimysium (the outer layer), perimysium (surrounding each fasciculus, or group of muscle
fibers), and endomysium (surrounding individual muscle fibers).
46

FIGURE 1.4  Motor unit, consisting of a motor neuron and the muscle fibers it
innervates. A single motor unit typically contains several hundred muscle fibers.
47

FIGURE 1.5 Sectional view of a muscle fiber.
Hundreds of myofibrils (each about 1 μm in diameter, 1/100 the
diameter of a hair) exist in the sarcoplasm of one muscle fiber.
Myofibrils are the contractile machinery of muscle fibers, and two
types of myofilaments are highly enriched in myofibrils, including
myosin and actin. The thicker myosin filaments (about 16 nm in
diameter, or 1/10,000 the diameter of a hair) contain up to 200
myosin molecules. A single myosin molecule consists of two myosin
heavy chain proteins and four myosin light chain proteins. This
molecule also contains two head-like features (one being from each
of the two heavy chains), two hinge points below each head, and
two tail-like features that act to keep the two heavy chain proteins
bound. When examining a thick filament containing hundreds of
myosin molecules, the globular heads protrude away from the thick
filament at regular intervals, and the head-like structures form
crossbridges with actin filaments during muscle contraction. The
thin actin filaments (about 6 nm in diameter) consist of two strands
arranged in a double helix. Myosin and actin filaments are organized
longitudinally in the smallest contractile unit of skeletal muscle
termed the sarcomere. Sarcomeres average about 2.5 μm in length
in a relaxed fiber (approximately 4,500 per centimeter of muscle
48

length) and are repeated through the entire length of myofibrils that
span the muscle fiber (4).
The arrangement of the myosin and actin filaments within
sarcomere boundaries give muscle fibers a striated dark/light
appearance under magnification. The dark A-band corresponds with
the alignment of the myosin filaments, whereas the light I-band
corresponds with the areas in two adjacent sarcomeres that contain
only actin filaments (41). The Z-line is in the middle of the I-band
and appears as a thin, dark line running longitudinally through the I-
band. The H-zone is the area in the center of the sarcomere, where
only myosin filaments are present. During muscle contraction, the H-
zone decreases as the actin filaments slide over myosin filaments
toward the center of the sarcomere. The I-band also decreases as
the Z-lines are pulled toward the center of the sarcomere.
49

FIGURE 1.6 General view of the myosin and actin filaments in muscle. The arrangement
of myosin (thick) and actin (thin) filaments gives skeletal muscle its striated appearance.
50

Figure 1.6 shows a simplistic depiction of myosin and actin in the
sarcomere. Biochemical bonds allow for myosin proteins to
aggregate into the highly organized thick myosin filament, and thick
filaments are anchored to specialized proteins in the M-line, which is
in the center of the sarcomere (the center of the H-zone). Actin
filaments are anchored to Z-lines through another set of specialized
proteins. Although both M-lines and Z-lines exist in tandem
throughout the entire myofibril, individual sarcomeres are defined as
the thick myosin and thin actin filaments as well as associated
proteins found between two Z-lines. It is also notable that six actin
filaments surround each myosin filament, and each actin filament is
surrounded by three myosin filaments. This lattice-like arrangement
enables a highly organized and efficient structure for muscular
contraction.
Each myofibril is encased by an intricate system of tubules, called
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (figure 1.5, page 5), which terminates
as vesicles in the vicinity of the Z-lines. Calcium ions are stored in
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and muscle activation leads to the
release of these calcium stores to facilitate muscular contraction.
Discharge of an action potential (an electrical nerve impulse)
arrives nearly simultaneously from the surface to all depths of the
muscle fiber. Calcium is thus released throughout the muscle fiber,
producing a coordinated contraction of the entire cell.
51

FIGURE 1.7 Contraction at the sarcomere level. (a) In stretched muscle the I-bands and
H-zone are elongated and there is low force potential due to a reduction in actin and
myosin overlap and, thus, actin-myosin cross-bridge formation potential. (b) When muscle
52

contracts (here partially), the I-bands and H-zone are shortened. In this example, force
potential is highest due to optimal actin and myosin overlap. (c) With contracted muscle,
force potential is again low because actin and myosin overlap is not optimal.
The discharge of an action potential from a motor
neuron signals the release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum into the myofibrils of a muscle
fiber, leading to a cascade of events that result in the
contraction of the muscle fiber.
Sliding-Filament Theory of Muscular Contraction
The sliding-filament theory was proposed by Huxley and Hanson
in 1954 to mechanistically explain muscular contraction at the
molecular level (22). In its simplest form, the sliding-filament theory
indicates that actin filaments anchored to each end of the sarcomere
slide inward on myosin filaments. This results in Z-lines being pulled
toward the center of the sarcomere and in muscle fiber shortening
(figure 1.7). As actin filaments slide over myosin filaments, both the
H-zone and I-band shrink. The energy-dependent association of
myosin heads with actin filaments (i.e., actin-myosin crossbridge
formation), as well as the energy-dependent inward movement of
actin filaments over the myosin filaments through what is termed the
power stroke, are the bases for muscle contraction. Although a
very small displacement of an actin filament occurs with each power
stroke, this action is rapidly repeated across all sarcomeres during
voluntary muscle contractions leading to appreciable movement with
prolonged contractions (41).
Resting Phase
When a muscle is not active, low levels of calcium are present in the
myofibrils of muscle fibers (most of it is stored in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum), so very few actin-myosin crossbridges are formed.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling Phase
53

When a motor neuron activates a muscle fiber, a cascade of events
occur that stimulate the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium
ions into the myofibrils of the muscle fiber. Secreted calcium ions
bind with a high affinity to the troponin protein, which exists at
regular intervals along the actin filament (figure 1.6). This calcium-
troponin interaction causes a shift in another protein termed
tropomyosin, which is bound to troponin and spans the length of
the actin filament. These events expose the myosin binding site on
actin and enable the myosin head to attach to the actin filament to
form an actin-myosin crossbridge (4). It is important to understand
that the amount of force produced by any given muscle is directly
related to the number of actin-myosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of that muscle (4). Thus, activities that require a
high force output necessitate the activation (or recruitment) of most
motor neurons and the muscle fibers they innervate to achieve the
maximal amount of actin-myosin crossbridge formation.
The number of actin-myosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of a given muscle at any instant in
time dictates the force production of the muscle.
Contraction Phase
The contraction phase involves the mechanical movement (or
pivoting) of the myosin head from the resting phase when the actin-
myosin crossbridge is formed, which leads to the pulling of the
associated actin filament to the center of the sarcomere. Critically,
this mechanical movement is catalyzed from the biochemical energy
provided by the hydrolysis (or breakdown) of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) by the myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase)
enzyme present on the myosin head. The products of ATP hydrolysis
include adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi),
metabolites that also serve critical roles in the contraction process.
While the different phases of the contraction phase are relatively
complex, they can be summarized as follows:
54

1. The myosin head hydrolyzes ATP into ADP and Pi, both of
which remain bound to the myosin head. The energy provided
by this biochemical reaction results in a conformational change
whereby the myosin head is cocked into a high-energy state.
2. In its high-energy state, the myosin head binds to actin to
form the actin-myosin crossbridge.
3. The release of Pi from the myosin head catalyzes a
confirmational change in the myosin molecule, leading to the
power stroke, which is the pivoting of the myosin head that
pulls the actin filament toward the center of the sarcomere.
4. Following the first power stroke, ADP is released from the
myosin head and another ATP molecule binds to the myosin
head.
5. The actin-myosin crossbridge is subsequently dissociated, the
myosin head returns to its original low-energy state and
conformation, and the process is repeated with the hydrolysis
of the newly bound ATP molecule.
So long as calcium ions remain bound to troponin during muscle
activation, contiguous rapid rounds of actin-myosin crossbridge
formation, power strokes, and actin-myosin crossbridge dissociation
will occur, and this is termed crossbridge cycling.
Calcium and ATP are necessary for crossbridge cycling
with actin and myosin filaments.
Relaxation Phase
Relaxation occurs when the stimulation of the motor neuron ceases.
Calcium is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum through
specialized transporters that also require ATP, and the restoration of
low calcium ion concentrations in myofibrils highly reduces the
number of actin-myosin crossbridges.
55

Neuromuscular System
Muscle fibers are innervated by motor neurons that transmit
impulses in the form of electrochemical signals from the spinal cord
to the muscle. A motor neuron generally has numerous terminal
branches at the end of its axon, allowing for several muscle fibers to
be innervated. This integrated structure is termed the motor unit.
Motor units can be generally described as slow-twitch, fast-
twitch/fatigue-resistant, and fast-twitch/fatigable. These motor unit
characteristics dictate muscle fiber type, contractile characteristics,
and involvement in different types of activities and exercise.
Activation of Muscles
When a motor neuron fires an impulse or action potential, all the
muscle fibers that it innervates are simultaneously activated and
contract through the mechanisms previously described. The number
of muscle fibers vary within each motor unit. Muscles that are
required to function with great precision, such as eye muscles, may
have motor units with as few as one muscle fiber. Changes in the
number of active motor units in these small muscles can produce the
extremely fine gradations in force that are necessary for precise
movements of the eyeball. In contrast, the quadriceps muscle group,
which moves the leg with much less precision, may have several
hundred muscle fibers innervated by one motor neuron.
An action potential is an electrochemical signal that travels along
a motor neuron from the cell body to the nerve terminal. However,
this signal is not capable of directly exciting muscle fibers. Instead,
the arrival of the action potential at nerve terminals of the motor
neuron 
causes 
the 
secretion 
of 
a 
neurotransmitter 
called
acetylcholine to each of the neuromuscular junctions contained
within the motor unit. Secreted acetylcholine binds to and activates
acetylcholine receptors present on the sarcolemma of muscle fibers
within the motor unit. Once enough acetylcholine receptors are
activated, action potentials are generated along the sarcolemma of
56

these muscle fibers. These action potentials continue down T-tubules
to eventually catalyze the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum as discussed earlier in this chapter. These events ultimately
lead to all the muscle fibers within the motor unit to simultaneously
contract and develop force. There is no evidence to date suggesting
that an active motor unit only activates a portion of the muscle
fibers to contract. Similarly, no evidence to date suggests that
individual muscle fibers can be partially activated within an active
motor unit. Hence, the all-or-none principle has been generally
used to describe this phenomenon; specifically, the activation of any
given motor neuron will lead to the activation and contraction of all
of the muscle fibers it innervates.
Each action potential traveling down a motor neuron results in the
rapid activation of the muscle fibers within the motor unit. The brief
contraction that occurs in response to one action potential is referred
to as a twitch. Although calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum during a twitch is sufficient to allow for actin-myosin
crossbridging to occur, a brief twitch (which lasts milliseconds) does
not enable a high level of force to be developed given that calcium is
rapidly sequestered back to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the
muscle fiber relaxes (figure 1.8a). If a second twitch is elicited from
the motor neuron before the innervated muscle fibers completely
relax, forces generated from the two twitches summate, resulting in
a greater force relative to that which is produced by a single twitch
(figure 1.8b). Decreasing the time interval between twitches results
in an even greater force summation, and a high activation frequency
leads to the merging of twitches in what has been termed unfused
and fused tetanic contractions (figure 1.8c and d). The force
generated by a motor unit during fused tetanic contractions (i.e., the
maximal tetanic force) is the maximal force that the motor unit can
develop (8). The ability of motor units to sustain this type of
contraction (along with the size of muscle fibers and motor unit
recruitment patterns) is likely one of the key determinants of
maximal force and power outputs during athletic endeavors.
57

FIGURE 1.8 Twitch, twitch summation, and tetanus of a motor unit: a = single twitch; b
= force resulting from summation of two twitches; c = unfused tetanus; d = fused tetanus.
Muscle Fiber Types
Skeletal muscles are composed of muscle fibers that have markedly
different morphological and physiological characteristics (37). These
differences have led to different classification systems, with the most
familiar including the terms slow-twitch and fast-twitch muscle
fibers. Because a motor unit innervates muscle fibers that are
metabolically and functionally similar to one another, motor units
have also been historically designated using this nomenclature. A
fast-twitch motor unit is one that develops force and relaxes rapidly,
thus exhibiting a shorter twitch time. Slow-twitch motor units, in
contrast, develop force and relax slowly and have a longer twitch
time. General differences between these types of motor units can be
found in figure 1.9.
Regarding muscle fiber classification, histochemical staining for
myosin ATPase content was also used for years to classify myofibers
as type I (slow-twitch), type IIa (fast-twitch), and type IIx (fast-
twitch). Other methods used for myofiber classification involve single
fiber isolation techniques to quantify the presence of different
myosin heavy chain isoforms and immunohistochemical staining for
myosin heavy chain isoforms (33). The nomenclature for both
techniques is akin to that associated with the myosin ATPase
histology methods.
58

Fiber types are also delineated by differences in fatigue resistance
and force production capabilities, and this can be due to small to
moderate differences in cellular morphology, intracellular protein
content, and organelle distribution. For instance, type I fibers are
generally more fatigue resistant relative to type II fibers, and type I
fibers have a higher capacity to produce ATP via aerobic metabolism.
This difference can be largely attributed to mitochondrial
characteristic differences between fiber types, because type I fibers
have a higher density and a more even distribution of mitochondria
between myofibrils relative to type II fibers (31). However, type I
fibers produce less overall force and yield a lower rate of force
development compared to type II fibers. These latter characteristic
differences are chiefly due to type I myofibers exhibiting lower
cellular diameters (and thus less myofibrils per cell) compared to
type II fibers (21). Additionally, myosin ATPase reaction rates differ
between the type I and II isoforms, wherein the type I isoform
exhibits a relatively lower reaction rate and thus a reduced rate at
which crossbridge cycling can occur (38).
59

FIGURE 1.9 Comparison of slow- and fast-twitch motor units: a = schematic of slow-
twitch and fast-twitch motor units innervating separate sets of muscle fibers; b =
characteristics of slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor units; c = hypothetical differences
between unweighted versus weighted arm curls on slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor unit
recruitment patterns. Note: In healthy individuals this innervation pattern (a) exists in a
pseudo-random mosaic pattern. Unlike non-weighted contractions that recruit lower
threshold motor units, weighted contractions (c) will recruit both lower threshold slow-
60

twitch and higher threshold fast-twitch motor units, which is an example of the size
principle of motor unit recruitment.
Other notable differences exist between type I and II fibers. For
instance, type I fibers have more contacts with capillaries compared
to type II fibers (5, 19, 23, 34), and this feature (along with smaller
cellular diameters and more intracellular myoglobin) yields a higher
oxygen diffusion potential that favors aerobic metabolism. A 2021
research study using sophisticated molecular approaches has also
unveiled that the content of hundreds of structural and metabolic
proteins differs between type I, IIa, and IIx fibers (30), and these
findings suggest that these appreciable differences contribute to the
unique fiber type characteristics discussed in this paragraph. Based
on these differences, it is not surprising that postural muscles, such
as the soleus, have a high composition of type I fibers, whereas
larger locomotor muscles, such as the quadriceps muscles, have a
mixture of both type I and type II fibers to enable both low and high
power output activities (such as jogging and sprinting, respectively).
Refer to table 1.1 for a summary of the primary characteristics of
fiber types.
Motor units are composed of muscle fibers with specific
morphological and physiological characteristics that
determine their functional capacity.
TABLE 1.1 Major Characteristics of Muscle Fiber
Types
Characteristic
Fiber types
Type I
Type IIa
Type IIx
Motor neuron size
Small
Large
Large
Recruitment threshold
Low
Intermediate/high
High
Nerve conduction velocity
Slow
Fast
Fast
61

Characteristic
Fiber types
Contraction speed
Slow
Fast
Fast
Relaxation speed
Slow
Fast
Fast
Fatigue resistance
High
Intermediate/low
Low
Endurance
High
Intermediate/low
Low
Force production
Low
Intermediate
High
Power output
Low
Intermediate/high
High
Aerobic enzyme content
High
Intermediate/low
Low
Anaerobic enzyme content
Low
High
High
Sarcoplasmic reticulum complexity
Low
Intermediate/high
High
Capillary density
High
Intermediate
Low
Myoglobin content
High
Low
Low
Mitochondrial size, density
High
Intermediate
Low
Fiber diameter
Small
Intermediate
Large
Color
Red
White/red
White
Motor Unit Recruitment Patterns
Through everyday experiences, it is evident that a given muscle can
vary its level of force output according to the level required by a
particular task. This ability to vary or gradate force is essential for
performance of smooth, coordinated patterns of movement.
Muscular force can be graded in two ways. One is through variation
in the frequency at which motor units are activated. A single twitch
results from one action potential, and this does not produce a great
deal of force. However, if the frequency of activation is increased so
that the forces of the twitches begin to overlap or summate, the
resulting force developed by the motor unit is much greater. This
method of varying force output is especially important in small
muscles, such as those of the hand. Even at low forces, most of the
motor units in these muscles are activated, albeit at a low frequency.
62

Force output of the whole muscle is intensified through an increase
in the frequency of firing of individual motor units. Another manner
to increase muscle force involves increasing the number of motor
units activated, a process known as recruitment. In large muscles,
such as those in the thigh, most motor units are required to be
activated at relatively higher frequencies during near-maximal
contraction efforts. As a result, increases in force output are
achieved through increases in motor unit firing frequency as well as
the recruitment of additional motor units.
TABLE 1.2 Relative Involvement of Muscle Fiber
Types in Sport Events
Event
Type I
Type II
100 m sprint
Low
High
800 m run
High
High
Marathon
High
Low
Olympic weightlifting
Low
High
Soccer, lacrosse, hockey
High
High
American football wide receiver
Low
High
American football lineman
Low
High
Basketball, team handball
Low
High
Volleyball
Low
High
Baseball or softball pitcher
Low
High
Mixed martial arts
High
High
Wrestling
High
High
50 m swim
Low
High
Field events
Low
High
Cross-country skiing, biathlon
High
Low
Tennis
High
High
63

Event
Type I
Type II
Downhill or slalom skiing
High
High
Speed skating
High
High
Bobsled
Low
High
Distance cycling
High
Low
Rowing
High
High
The types of motor units recruited for a given activity are
determined by the physiological demand imposed by that activity
over a given unit of time (table 1.2). For an activity such as slower
long-distance running, slow-twitch motor units are predominantly
engaged in working muscles given that physiological demand is not
relatively high over time and these motor units possess a heightened
endurance capacity and resistance to fatigue. Sprints at the end of a
race that impose a relatively higher physiological demand, however,
require the additional activation of fast-twitch motor units. If an
activity requires near-maximal contractions over very short time
periods, such as those observed with the power clean, most of the
motor units in the involved muscle(s) are recruited and the fast-
twitch motor units make more of a significant contribution to the
effort. Electromyography estimates have indicated that maximal
voluntary contractions with higher intensity weightlifting typically
lead to approximately 90% or more activation of available motor
units in the involved muscle(s) (7). However, some caveats must be
considered with this estimation. First, the activation of the entire
motor neuron pool is probably not possible in untrained people (9,
10, 18). Moreover, although large fast-twitch units may be recruited
if the effort is substantial, it is probably not possible to activate them
at a high enough frequency under most circumstances for maximal
force to be realized. These details aside, it is important to appreciate
that motor unit activation varies regarding different types of physical
activity.
64

The force output of a muscle can be varied through
changes in the frequency of activation of individual
motor units as well as a change in the number of
activated motor units.
Proprioception
Proprioceptors are specialized sensory receptors located within
joints, muscles, and tendons. Because these receptors are sensitive
to pressure and tension, they relay information concerning muscle
dynamics to the conscious and subconscious parts of the central
nervous system. The brain is thus provided with information
concerning kinesthetic sense, or conscious appreciation of the
position of body parts with respect to gravity. Most of this
proprioceptive information, however, is processed at subconscious
levels so we do not have to dedicate conscious activity toward tasks
such as maintaining posture or position of body parts.
Proprioceptors are specialized sensory receptors that
provide the central nervous system with information
needed to maintain muscle tone and perform complex
coordinated movements.
Muscle Spindles
Muscle spindles are proprioceptors that consist of several modified
muscle fibers enclosed in a sheath of connective tissue (figure 1.10).
These modified fibers, called intrafusal fibers, run parallel to the
normal, or extrafusal, fibers. Muscle spindles provide information
concerning muscle length and the rate of change in length. When
the muscle lengthens, spindles are stretched. This deformation
activates the sensory neuron of the spindle, which sends an impulse
to the spinal cord, where it synapses (connects) with motor neurons.
This results in the activation of motor neurons that innervate the
same muscle. Spindles thus indicate the degree to which the muscle
65

must be activated in order to overcome a given resistance. As a load
increases, the muscle is stretched to a greater extent, and
engagement of muscle spindles results in greater activation of the
muscle. Muscles that perform precise movements have many
spindles per unit of mass to help ensure exact control of their
contractile activity. A simple example of muscle spindle activity is the
knee jerk reflex. Tapping on the tendon of the knee extensor muscle
group below the patella stretches the muscle spindle fibers. This
causes activation of extrafusal muscle fibers in the same muscle. A
knee jerk occurs as these fibers actively shorten. This, in turn,
shortens the intrafusal fibers and causes their discharge to cease.
FIGURE 1.10 Muscle spindle. When a muscle is stretched, deformation of the muscle
spindle activates the sensory neuron, which sends an impulse to the spinal cord, where it
synapses with a motor neuron, causing the muscle to contract.
66

How Can Athletes Improve Force
Production?
Incorporate phases of training that use heavier loads (or explosive actions) to
optimize motor unit recruitment and firing frequency patterns
Also incorporate phases of training that promote skeletal muscular
hypertrophy given that more myofibrils (and thus more actin-myosin
crossbridges) will be available for near-maximal muscle contractions
Finally, implement training methods that specifically target movements where
increases in force are desired (e.g., heavy bench press and back squat
exercises for increasing pushing forces)
Golgi Tendon Organs
Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) are proprioceptors located in
tendons near the myotendinous junction and are in series—that is,
attached end to end, with extrafusal muscle fibers (figure 1.10).
Golgi tendon organs are activated when the tendon attached to an
active muscle is stretched. As tension in the muscle and tendons
increases, the discharge of the GTOs increases. The sensory neuron
of the GTO synapses with an inhibitory interneuron in the spinal
cord, which in turn synapses with and inhibits a motor neuron that
serves the same muscle. The result is a reduction in tension within
the muscle and tendon. Thus, whereas spindles facilitate activation
of the muscle, neural input from GTOs inhibits muscle activation.
The GTOs’ inhibitory process is thought to provide a mechanism that
protects against the development of excessive tension. The effect of
GTOs is therefore minimal at low forces, but when an extremely
heavy load is placed on the muscle, reflexive inhibition mediated by
the GTOs causes the muscle to relax. The ability of the motor cortex
to override this inhibition may be one of the fundamental
adaptations to heavy resistance training.
67

Cardiovascular System
The primary roles of the cardiovascular system are to transport
nutrients and remove waste and by-products while assisting with
maintaining the environment for all the body’s functions. The
cardiovascular system plays key roles in the regulation of the body’s
acid–base system, fluids, and temperature, as well as a variety of
other physiological functions. This section describes the anatomy
and physiology of the heart and the blood vessels.
Heart
The heart is a muscular organ composed of two interconnected but
separate pumps; the right side of the heart pumps blood through
the lungs, and the left side pumps blood through the rest of the
body. Each pump has two chambers: an atrium and a ventricle
(figure 1.11). The right and left atria deliver blood into the right and
left ventricles. The right and left ventricles supply the main force for
moving blood through the pulmonary and peripheral circulations,
respectively (41).
Valves
The tricuspid valve and mitral valve (bicuspid valve) (collectively
called atrioventricular [AV] valves) prevent the flow of blood
from the ventricles back into the atria during ventricular contraction
(systole). The aortic valve and pulmonary valve (collectively,
the semilunar valves) prevent backflow from the aorta and
pulmonary arteries into the ventricles during ventricular relaxation
(diastole). Each valve opens and closes passively; that is, each
closes when a backward pressure gradient pushes blood back
against it, opening when a forward pressure gradient forces blood in
the forward direction (41).
68

Conduction System
A specialized electrical conduction system (figure 1.12) controls the
mechanical contraction of the heart. The conduction system is
composed of
the sinoatrial (SA) node—the intrinsic pacemaker—where
rhythmic electrical impulses are normally initiated;
the internodal pathways that conduct the impulse from the SA
node to the atrioventricular node;
the atrioventricular (AV) node, where the impulse is
delayed slightly before passing into the ventricles;
the atrioventricular (AV) bundle, which conducts the
impulse to the ventricles; and
the left bundle branch and right bundle branch, which
further divide into the Purkinje fibers and conduct impulses
to all parts of the ventricles.
The SA node is a small area of specialized muscle tissue located in
the upper lateral wall of the right atrium. The fibers of the node are
contiguous with the muscle fibers of the atrium, with the result that
each electrical impulse that begins in the SA node normally spreads
immediately into the atria. The conductive system is organized so
that the impulse does not travel into the ventricles too rapidly,
allowing time for the atria to contract and empty blood into the
ventricles before ventricular contraction begins. It is primarily the AV
node and its associated conductive fibers that delay each impulse
entering into the ventricles. The AV node is located in the posterior
septal wall of the right atrium (41).
The left and right bundle branches lead from the AV bundle into
the ventricles. Except for their initial portion, where they penetrate
the AV barrier, these conduction fibers have functional characteristics
quite opposite those of the AV nodal fibers. They are large and
transmit impulses at a much higher velocity than the AV nodal fibers.
Because these fibers give way to the Purkinje fibers, which more
completely penetrate the ventricles, the impulse travels quickly
69

throughout the entire ventricular system and causes both ventricles
to contract at approximately the same time (41).
The SA node normally controls heart rhythmicity because its
discharge rate is considerably greater (60-80 times per minute) than
that of either the AV node (40-60 times per minute) or the
ventricular fibers (15-40 times per minute). Each time the SA node
discharges, its impulse is conducted into the AV node and the
ventricular fibers, discharging their excitable membranes. Thus,
these potentially self-excitatory tissues are discharged before self-
excitation can actually occur.
70

FIGURE 1.11 Structure of the human heart and the course of blood flow through its
chambers.
71

FIGURE 1.12 The electrical conduction system of the heart.
The inherent rhythmicity and conduction properties of the
myocardium (heart muscle) are influenced by the cardiovascular
center of the medulla, which transmits signals to the heart through
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, both
of which are components of the autonomic nervous system. The
atria are supplied with a large number of both sympathetic and
parasympathetic 
neurons, 
whereas 
the 
ventricles 
receive
sympathetic fibers almost exclusively. Stimulation of the sympathetic
nerves accelerates depolarization of the SA node (the chronotropic
effect), which causes the heart to beat faster. Stimulation of the
parasympathetic nervous system slows the rate of SA node
discharge, which slows the heart rate. The resting heart rate
normally ranges from 60 to 100 beats/min; fewer than 60 beats/min
is called bradycardia, and more than 100 beats/min is called
tachycardia.
72

Electrocardiogram
The electrical activity of the heart can be recorded at the surface of
the body; a graphic representation of this activity is called an
electrocardiogram (ECG). A normal ECG, seen in figure 1.13, is
composed of a P-wave, a QRS complex (the QRS complex is often
three separate waves: a Q-wave, an R-wave, and an S-wave), and a
T-wave. The P-wave and the QRS complex are recordings of
electrical depolarization—that is, the electrical stimulus that leads to
mechanical contraction. Depolarization is the reversal of the
membrane electrical potential, whereby the normally negative
potential inside the membrane becomes slightly positive and the
outside becomes slightly negative. The P-wave is generated by the
changes in the electrical potential of cardiac muscle cells that
depolarize the atria and result in atrial contraction. The QRS complex
is generated by the electrical potential that depolarizes the ventricles
and results in ventricular contraction. In contrast, the T-wave is
caused by the electrical potential generated as the ventricles recover
from 
the 
state 
of 
depolarization; 
this 
process, 
called
repolarization, 
occurs 
in 
ventricular 
muscle 
shortly 
after
depolarization. Although atrial repolarization occurs as well, its wave
formation usually occurs during the time of ventricular depolarization
and is thus masked by the QRS complex (41).
73

FIGURE 1.13 Normal electrocardiogram.
Blood Vessels
The central and peripheral circulation form a single closed-circuit
system with two components: an arterial system, which carries
blood away from the heart, and a venous system, which returns
blood toward the heart (figure 1.14). The blood vessels of each
system are identified here.
74

FIGURE 1.14 The arterial (right) and venous (left) components of the circulatory system.
The percent values indicate the distribution of blood volume throughout the circulatory
system at rest.
Arteries
The function of arteries is to rapidly transport blood pumped from
the heart. Because blood pumped from the heart is under relatively
high pressure, arteries have strong, muscular walls. Small branches
of arteries called arterioles act as control vessels through which
blood enters the capillaries. Arterioles play a major role in the
regulation of blood flow to the capillaries. Arterioles have strong,
muscular walls that are capable of closing the arteriole completely or
allowing it to be dilated many times their size, thus vastly altering
blood flow to the capillaries in response to the needs of the tissues
(41).
75

Capillaries
The function of capillaries is to facilitate exchange of oxygen, fluid,
nutrients, electrolytes, hormones, and other substances between the
blood and the interstitial fluid in the various tissues of the body. The
capillary walls are very thin and are permeable to these, but not all,
substances (41).
Veins
Venules collect blood from the capillaries and gradually converge
into the progressively larger veins, which transport blood back to
the heart. Because the pressure in the venous system is very low,
venous walls are thin, although muscular. This allows them to
constrict or dilate to a great degree and thereby act as a reservoir
for blood, either in small or in large amounts (41). In addition, some
veins, such as those in the legs, contain one-way valves that help
maintain venous return by preventing retrograde blood flow.
What Is the Skeletal Muscle Pump?
The skeletal muscle pump is the assistance that contracting muscles provide to the
circulatory system. The muscle pump works with the venous system, which
contains the one-way valves for blood return to the heart. The contracting muscle
compresses the veins, but since the blood can flow only in the direction of the
valves, it is returned to the heart. This mechanism is one of the reasons why it is
important to periodically contract leg muscles or to take walking breaks during
prolonged sitting. These activities act to prevent blood pooling in the legs and
facilitate venous blood return to the heart.
The cardiovascular system transports nutrients and
removes waste products while helping to maintain the
environment for all the body’s functions. The blood
transports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues for use
in cellular metabolism. Blood also transports carbon
dioxide 
(mainly 
as 
bicarbonate 
ions) 
from 
the
76

metabolically active tissues to the lungs, where it is
removed from the body.
Blood
Two paramount functions of blood are the transport of oxygen from
the lungs to the tissues for use in cellular metabolism and the
removal of carbon dioxide, the most abundant by-product of
metabolism, from the tissues to the lungs. The transport of oxygen
is accomplished by hemoglobin, the iron–protein molecule carried
by the red blood cells. Hemoglobin also has an additional important
role as an acid–base buffer, a regulator of hydrogen ion
concentration, which is crucial to the rates of chemical reactions in
cells. Red blood cells, the major component of blood, have other
functions as well. For instance, they contain a large quantity of
carbonic anhydrase, which catalyzes the reaction between carbon
dioxide and water to facilitate carbon dioxide removal.
77

Respiratory System
The primary function of the respiratory system is the basic exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide. The anatomy of the human
respiratory system is shown in figure 1.15. As air passes through the
nose, the nasal cavities perform three distinct functions: warming,
humidifying, and purifying the air (41). Air is distributed to the lungs
by way of the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. The trachea is
called the first-generation respiratory passage, and the right and left
main bronchi are the second-generation passages; each division
thereafter is an additional generation (bronchioles). There are
approximately 23 generations before the air finally reaches the
alveoli, where gases are exchanged in respiration (41).
The primary function of the respiratory system is the
basic exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Exchange of Air
The amount and movement of air and expired gases in and out of
the lungs are controlled by expansion and recoil of the lungs. The
lungs do not actively expand and recoil themselves but rather are
acted on to do so in two ways: by downward and upward movement
of the diaphragm to lengthen and shorten the chest cavity and by
elevation and depression of the ribs to increase and decrease the
back-to-front diameter of the chest cavity (41). Normal, quiet
breathing is accomplished almost entirely by movement of the
diaphragm. During inspiration, contraction of the diaphragm creates
a negative pressure (vacuum) in the chest cavity, and air is drawn
into the lungs. During expiration, the diaphragm simply relaxes; the
elastic recoil of the lungs, chest wall, and abdominal structures
compresses the lungs, and air is expelled. During heavy breathing,
the elastic forces alone are not powerful enough to provide the
necessary respiratory response. The extra required force is achieved
78

mainly by contraction of the abdominal muscles, which push the
abdomen upward against the bottom of the diaphragm (41).
The second method for expanding the lungs is to raise the rib
cage. Because the chest cavity is small and the ribs are slanted
downward while in the resting position, elevating the rib cage allows
the ribs to project almost directly forward so that the sternum can
move forward and away from the spine. The muscles that elevate
the rib cage are called muscles of inspiration and include the
external intercostals, the sternocleidomastoids, the anterior serrati,
and the scaleni. The muscles that depress the chest are muscles of
expiration and include the abdominal muscles (rectus abdominis,
external and internal obliques, and transversus abdominis) and the
internal intercostals (41).
79

FIGURE 1.15 Gross anatomy of the human respiratory system.
How Important Is It to Train the Muscles
of Respiration?
Regular exercise in general is beneficial for maintaining respiratory muscle
function. Both endurance exercise, which involves repetitive contraction of
breathing muscles, and resistance exercise, which taxes the diaphragm and
abdominal muscles especially because of their use for stabilization and for
increasing intra-abdominal pressure (Valsalva maneuver), can result in some
muscle training adaptations. This can help to preserve some of the pulmonary
function with aging.
80

Pleural pressure is the pressure in the narrow space between
the lung pleura and the chest wall pleura (membranes enveloping
the lungs and lining the chest walls). This pressure is normally
slightly negative. Because the lung is an elastic structure, during
normal inspiration the expansion of the chest cage can pull on the
surface of the lungs and create a more negative pressure, thus
enhancing inspiration. During expiration, the events are essentially
reversed (41).
Alveolar pressure is the pressure inside the alveoli when the
glottis is open, and no air is flowing into or out of the lungs. In fact,
in this instance the pressure in all parts of the respiratory tree is the
same all the way to the alveoli and is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. To cause inward flow of air during inspiration, the pressure
in the alveoli must fall to a value slightly below atmospheric
pressure. During expiration, alveolar pressure must rise above
atmospheric pressure (41).
During normal respiration at rest, only 3% to 5% of the total
energy expended by the body is required for pulmonary ventilation.
During very heavy exercise, however, the amount of energy required
can increase to as much as 8% to 15% of total body energy
expenditure, especially if the person has any degree of increased
airway resistance, as occurs with exercise-induced asthma.
Precautions, including physician evaluation of the athlete, are often
recommended, depending on the potential level of impairment.
Exchange of Respiratory Gases
With ventilation, oxygen diffuses from the alveoli into the pulmonary
blood, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the alveoli.
The process of diffusion is a simple random motion of molecules
moving in opposite directions through the alveolar capillary
membrane. The energy for diffusion is provided by the kinetic
motion of the molecules themselves. Net diffusion of the gas occurs
from the region of high concentration to the region of low
concentration. The rates of diffusion of the two gases depend on
81

their concentrations in the capillaries and alveoli and the partial
pressure of each gas (41).
At rest, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is about 60
mmHg greater than that in the pulmonary capillaries. Thus, oxygen
diffuses into the pulmonary capillary blood. Similarly, carbon dioxide
diffuses in the opposite direction. This process of gas exchange is so
rapid as to be thought of as instantaneous (41).
82

Acute Responses to Aerobic Exercise
A single bout of aerobic exercise places a significant metabolic
demand on the body, especially the cardiovascular, respiratory, and
muscular systems. Repeated exposure to the acute stress of exercise
that occurs with chronic exercise training results in many changes in
the function and responses of all body systems. A basic knowledge
of the acute effects of aerobic exercise provides the foundation for
an understanding of the chronic adaptations that are discussed in
chapter 6.
Cardiovascular Responses
The primary functions of the cardiovascular system during aerobic
exercise are to deliver oxygen and other nutrients to the working
muscles and remove metabolites and waste products. This section
describes the cardiovascular mechanisms of these acute responses.
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is the amount of blood pumped by the heart in
liters per minute and is determined by the quantity of blood ejected
with each beat (stroke volume) and the heart’s rate of pumping
(heart rate):
Q̇ = Stroke volume × Heart rate (1.1)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output. Stroke volume is measured in
milliliters of blood per beat, and heart rate is measured in beats
(contractions) per minute (17).
In the progression from rest to steady-state aerobic exercise,
cardiac output initially increases rapidly, then more gradually, and
subsequently reaches a plateau. With maximal exercise, cardiac
output may increase to four times the resting level of about 5 L/min
to a maximum of 20 to 22 L/min (1). Stroke volume begins to
increase at the onset of exercise and continues to rise until the
individual’s oxygen consumption is at approximately 40% to 50% of
83

maximal oxygen uptake (1). At that point, stroke volume begins to
plateau. Sedentary college-aged men have maximal stroke volumes
averaging between 100 and 120 mL of blood per beat; maximal
stroke volumes for college-aged women are approximately 25% less,
due to a smaller average body size as well as a smaller heart muscle
(32). The effect of training on the responses to exercise is marked,
and we see an increase in maximal stroke volume for college-aged
men up to 150 to 160 mL per beat and approximately 100 to 110 for
college-aged women (32).
Stroke Volume
Two physiological mechanisms are responsible for the regulation of
stroke volume. The first is a result of the end-diastolic volume,
the volume of blood available to be pumped by the left ventricle at
the end of the filling phase, or diastole. The second is due to the
action of catecholamines, including epinephrine and norepinephrine,
which are hormones of the sympathetic nervous system that
produce a more forceful ventricular contraction and greater systolic
emptying of the heart.
At the onset of exercise, or even with the anticipation of exercise,
sympathetic stimulation increases myocardial contractility and
consequently increases stroke volume (14, 27). With prolonged
aerobic exercise, the amount of blood returning to the heart (also
called venous return) is increased due to a combination of
venoconstriction (induced via increased sympathetic nervous system
activation) (2), the skeletal muscle pump (muscular contractions
combine with one-way venous valves to “push” more blood to the
heart during exercise (16), and the respiratory pump (increased
respiratory frequency and tidal volume) (28). These responses result
in pressure alterations on the chambers of the heart and thoracic
vena cava, which promote increased venous return (28), and thus
end-diastolic volume is significantly increased. With the increased
volume, the myocardial fibers become more stretched than at rest,
resulting in a more forceful contraction, an increase in force of
84

systolic ejection, and greater cardiac emptying (17). This principle,
called the Frank-Starling mechanism, is related to the concept
that the force of contraction is a function of the length of the fibers
of the muscle wall. This increase in cardiac emptying is characterized
by an increase in the ejection fraction, or the fraction of the end-
diastolic volume ejected from the heart (14, 17).
Heart Rate
Just before and at the beginning of an exercise session, a reflex or
anticipatory stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system results in
an increase in heart rate. Heart rate increases linearly with increases
in intensity during aerobic exercise (14). The rate of increase in
heart rate, the actual heart rate response, and the maximal heart
rate achieved relate to a variety of individual characteristics of the
human system, including fitness and age, in addition to exercise
workload.
How Can Athletes Estimate Maximal Heart
Rate?
A simple estimate of maximal heart rate is to subtract one’s age from 220; for
example, the estimated maximal heart rate for a 47-year-old person is
220 – 47 (age in years) = 173 beats/min.
The variance, or standard deviation, around this estimate is ±10 to 12 beats/min;
thus the actual maximal heart rate for this individual could be expected to fall
within the range of 161 to 185 beats/min. A meta-analysis determined that the
equation 208 – 0.7 × age could be used in healthy adults to more accurately
predict maximal heart rate (40).
Oxygen Uptake
Oxygen uptake is the amount of oxygen consumed by the body’s
tissues. The oxygen demand of working muscles increases during an
acute bout of aerobic exercise and is directly related to the mass of
exercising muscle, metabolic efficiency, and exercise intensity.
Aerobic exercise involving larger muscles is likely to be associated
85

with a higher total oxygen uptake. Increased metabolic efficiency
allows for an increase in oxygen uptake, especially at maximal
exercise.
Maximal oxygen uptake is the greatest amount of oxygen that
can be used at the cellular level for the entire body. Maximal oxygen
uptake has been found to correlate well with the degree of aerobic
conditioning and is recognized as the most widely accepted measure
of cardiorespiratory fitness (14). The capacity to use oxygen is
largely related to the ability of the heart and circulatory system to
transport oxygen. However, muscular characteristics such as muscle
fiber type, muscle fiber mitochondrial density, and capillary density in
muscle tissue also affect maximal oxygen uptake. Resting oxygen
uptake is estimated at 3.5 mL of oxygen per kilogram of body weight
per minute (mL · kg−1 · min−1) for an average person; this value is
defined as 1 metabolic equivalent (MET). Maximal oxygen
uptake values in normal, healthy individuals generally range from 25
to 80 mL · kg−1 · min−1, or 7.1 to 22.9 METs, and depend on a
variety of physiological parameters, including age and conditioning
level (17).
Oxygen uptake (V̇O2) can be calculated with the Fick equation,
which expresses the relationship of cardiac output, oxygen uptake,
and arteriovenous oxygen difference:
V̇O2 = Q̇ × a-vO2 difference    (1.2)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output in milliliters per minute and a-vO2
difference is the arteriovenous oxygen difference (the difference
in the oxygen content between arterial and venous blood) in
milliliters of oxygen per 100 mL of blood. Recalling equation 1.1, we
can calculate oxygen uptake as shown in the following example:
V̇O2 = Heart rate × Stroke volume × a-vO2 difference
V̇O2 = 72 beats/min × 65 mL blood/beat × 6 mL O2/100 mL blood = 281
mL O2/min
To express oxygen uptake in its common unit (i.e., mL · kg−1 ·
min−1), we would then divide the result by the person’s weight in
86

kilograms. This is an example for an 80 kilogram (176 pound)
athlete:
V̇O2 = 281 mL O2/min ÷ 80 kg
V̇O2 = 3.5 mL · kg−1 · min−1
Blood Pressure
Systolic blood pressure estimates the pressure exerted against
the arterial walls as blood is forcefully ejected during ventricular
contraction (systole) and, when combined with heart rate, can be
used to describe the myocardial oxygen consumption (work) of the
heart. This estimate of the work of the heart is obtained according
to the following equation and is referred to as the rate–pressure
product, or double product:
Rate–pressure product =     Heart rate × Systolic blood pressure    (1.3)
Diastolic blood pressure is used to estimate the pressure
exerted against the arterial walls when no blood is being forcefully
ejected through the vessels (diastole). Diastolic blood pressure
provides an indication of peripheral resistance and can decrease with
aerobic exercise due to vasodilation. In systemic circulation, pressure
is highest in the aorta and arteries and rapidly falls off within the
venous circulation. Also, because pumping by the heart is pulsatile,
resting arterial pressure on average fluctuates between a systolic
level of 120 mmHg and a diastolic level of 80 mmHg (approximate
values). As the blood flow continues through the systemic
circulation, its pressure falls progressively to nearly 0 mmHg (venous
pressure) by the time it reaches the termination of the vena cava in
the right atrium (17).
The mean arterial pressure is the average blood pressure
throughout the cardiac cycle (equation 1.4). Mean arterial pressure
is not the average of systolic and diastolic pressures, because the
arterial pressure usually remains nearer the diastolic level than the
systolic level during a greater portion of the cardiac cycle. Thus, the
87

mean arterial pressure is usually less than the average of the systolic
and diastolic pressures.
Mean arterial blood pressure = [(Systolic blood pressure − Diastolic blood
pressure) ÷ 3] + Diastolic blood pressure    (1.4)
Normal resting blood pressure generally ranges from 110 to 139
mmHg systolic and from 60 to 89 mmHg diastolic. With maximal
aerobic exercise, systolic pressure can normally rise to as much as
220 to 260 mmHg, while diastolic pressure remains at the resting
level or decreases slightly (17, 27).
Control of Local Circulation
Resistance to blood flow is also increased with increasing viscosity of
the blood and the length of the vessel. However, these factors
remain relatively constant under most circumstances. Thus,
vasoconstriction (reduction in vessel diameter) and vasodilation
(increase in vessel diameter) are the primary mechanisms for
regulating regional blood flow.
During aerobic exercise, blood flow to active muscles is
considerably increased by the dilation of local arterioles; at the same
time, blood flow to other organ systems is reduced by constriction of
the arterioles. At rest, 15% to 20% of cardiac output is distributed to
skeletal muscle, whereas with vigorous exercise this value may rise
to 90% of cardiac output (14, 27).
Acute aerobic exercise results in increased cardiac
output, stroke volume, heart rate, oxygen uptake,
systolic blood pressure, and blood flow to active muscles
and a decrease in diastolic blood pressure.
Respiratory Responses
Aerobic exercise provides for the greatest impact on both oxygen
uptake and carbon dioxide production as compared to other types of
exercise, such as anaerobic resistance training. Significant increases
88

in oxygen delivered to the tissue, carbon dioxide returned to the
lungs, and minute ventilation (the volume of air breathed per
minute) provide for appropriate levels of alveolar gas concentrations
during aerobic exercise (27).
With aerobic exercise, increased minute ventilation occurs as a
result of increases in the depth of breathing, frequency of breathing,
or both. During strenuous exercise, the breathing frequency of
healthy young adults usually increases from 12 to 15 breaths per
minute at rest to 35 to 45 breaths per minute, while tidal volume
(TV), the amount of air inhaled and exhaled with each breath,
increases from resting values of 0.4 to 1 L to as much as 3 L or
greater. Consequently, the minute ventilation can increase to 15 to
25 times the resting value, or to values of 90 to 150 L of air per
minute (14, 17, 27).
During low- to moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, there is an
increase in ventilation directly associated with both increased oxygen
uptake and carbon dioxide production. In this instance, the increase
in ventilation is primarily due to increased tidal volume. The ratio of
minute ventilation to oxygen uptake is termed the ventilatory
equivalent and ranges between 20 and 25 L of air per L of oxygen
consumed. In more intense exercise (generally above 45% to 65%
of maximal oxygen uptake in untrained individuals and 70% to 90%
in trained athletes), breathing frequency takes on a greater role. At
these levels, minute ventilation rises disproportionately to the
increases in oxygen uptake and begins to parallel the abrupt rise in
blood lactate. At this point, the ventilatory equivalent may increase
to 35 or 40 L of air per L of oxygen consumed with this high-
intensity activity (14, 27).
With inspiration, air enters the alveoli, the functional unit of the
pulmonary system where gas exchange occurs. However, with
inspiration, air also occupies areas of the respiratory passages: the
nose, mouth, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. This area is not
functional for gas exchange and is called the anatomical dead
space. The normal volume of this air space is approximately 150 mL
89

in young adults and increases with age. Because the respiratory
passages stretch with deep breathing, the anatomical dead space
increases as tidal volume increases (figure 1.16). Nevertheless, the
increase in tidal volume with deep breathing is proportionately
greater than any increase in anatomical dead space. Thus,
increasing tidal volume (deeper breathing) provides for more
efficient ventilation than increasing frequency of breathing alone (17,
27).
Physiological dead space refers to alveoli in which poor blood
flow, poor ventilation, or other problems with the alveolar surface
impair gas exchange. The physiological dead space in the lungs of
healthy people is usually negligible because all or nearly all alveoli
are functional. Certain types of lung disease such as chronic
obstructive lung disease or pneumonia can significantly reduce
alveolar function, increasing physiological dead space by as much as
10 times the volume of anatomical dead space (17, 27).
During aerobic exercise, large amounts of oxygen
diffuse from the capillaries into the tissues; increased
levels of carbon dioxide move from the blood into the
alveoli; and minute ventilation increases to maintain
appropriate alveolar concentrations of these gases.
90

FIGURE 1.16 Distribution of tidal volume in a healthy athlete at rest. The tidal volume
comprises about 350 mL of room air that mixes with alveolar air, about 150 mL of air in the
larger passages (anatomical dead space), and a small portion of air distributed to either
poorly ventilated or incompletely filled alveoli (physiological dead space).
Gas Responses
Diffusion is the movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide across a
cell membrane and is a function of the concentration of each gas
and the resulting partial pressure exerted by the molecular motion of
each gas. Diffusion results from the movement of gas from high
concentration to low concentration. At the tissue level, where oxygen
is used in metabolism and carbon dioxide is produced, the partial
pressures of these gases in some instances differ considerably from
those in arterial blood (figure 1.17). At rest, the partial pressure of
oxygen in the interstitial fluid (fluid between muscle fibers) rapidly
drops from 100 mmHg in arterial blood to as low as 40 mmHg, while
the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is elevated above that of
arterial blood to about 46 mmHg. During high-intensity aerobic
exercise, the partial pressures of these gases are approximately 3
mmHg for oxygen and 90 mmHg for carbon dioxide. Consequently,
91

these pressure gradients cause the movement of gases across cell
membranes. In addition, the diffusing capacities of oxygen and, in
particular, carbon dioxide increase dramatically with exercise, which
facilitates their exchange (14, 17, 27).
FIGURE 1.17 Pressure gradients for gas transfer in the body at rest. The pressures of
oxygen (PO2) and carbon dioxide (PCO2) in alveolar air, venous and arterial blood, and
muscle tissue are shown.
Blood Transport of Gases and Metabolic
By-Products
Oxygen is carried in blood either dissolved in the plasma or
combined with hemoglobin. Because oxygen is not readily soluble in
fluids, only about 3 mL of oxygen can be carried per liter of plasma.
92

Nonetheless, this limited amount of oxygen transported in plasma
contributes to the partial pressure of oxygen in blood and other body
fluids, thus playing a role in the mechanisms that regulate breathing
and in the diffusion of oxygen into alveolar blood and the cells of
body tissues (17, 27).
Given the limited capacity of plasma to carry oxygen, the majority
of oxygen in blood is carried by the hemoglobin. Men have about 15
to 16 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood, and women have about
14 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood. One gram of hemoglobin
can carry 1.34 mL of oxygen; thus, the oxygen-carrying capacity of
100 mL of blood is about 20 mL of oxygen in men and a little less in
women (27).
The way in which carbon dioxide is removed from the system has
some similarities to oxygen transport, but the vast amount of carbon
dioxide is removed by a more complex process. After carbon dioxide
is formed in the cell, it easily diffuses across the cell membranes and
is subsequently transported to the lungs. As with oxygen, only a
limited quantity of carbon dioxide—about 5% of that produced
during metabolism—is carried in the plasma; similar to the situation
with oxygen, this limited amount of carbon dioxide contributes to
establishing the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood.
Some carbon dioxide is also transported via hemoglobin, but this
amount is limited (27).
The greatest amount of carbon dioxide removal (approximately
70%) is from the combination with water and delivery to the lungs in
the form of bicarbonate (HCO3−). The initial step in this reversible
reaction is the combination of carbon dioxide in solution with water
in the red blood cells to form carbonic acid. The reaction would
normally be quite slow except for the impact of the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which significantly speeds up this process. Once carbonic
acid is formed, it is broken down to hydrogen ions and bicarbonate
ions. Because hemoglobin is a significant acid–base buffer, hydrogen
ions combine with hemoglobin. This process helps to maintain the
pH of the blood. Bicarbonate ions diffuse from the red blood cells to
93

the plasma, while chloride ions diffuse into the blood cells to replace
them (17, 27).
94

Cardiovascular and Respiratory
Responses to Anaerobic Exercise
Acute bouts of anaerobic exercise and long-term anaerobic training
both have a significant impact on cardiovascular and respiratory
function. This is reflected in both anaerobic athletes (12) and
sedentary individuals (22), where enhanced cardiac function and
dimensions are apparent. Heavy-load resistance training, resistance
training with more repetitions of light loads and less rest, and
conventional aerobic endurance training are all beneficial to the
cardiovascular system but in different ways (13). Improved ability of
the heart, lungs, and circulatory system to function under conditions
of high pressure and force production can prepare the athlete’s body
for the extreme demands of sporting competition.
Acute Cardiovascular Responses to
Anaerobic Exercise
An acute bout of anaerobic exercise significantly increases
cardiovascular responses. Heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output,
and blood pressure all increase significantly during resistance
exercise. Peak blood pressures of 320/250 mmHg and a heart rate of
170 beats/min have been reported during a high-intensity (i.e., 95%
of 1RM) leg press exercise (26). Generally, the blood pressure
response increases nonlinearly with the magnitude of active muscle
mass and is higher during the concentric phase of each repetition
than during the eccentric phase, especially at the “sticking point” of
an exercise. Although large elevations in blood pressure have been
reported during exercise bouts themselves, there are limited data to
indicate that resistance training has any negative effects on resting
blood pressure (6). In addition, intrathoracic pressure increases, and
plasma volume reductions of up to 22% have been reported (34,
36).
95

Acute anaerobic exercise results in increased cardiac
output, stroke volume, heart rate, oxygen uptake,
systolic blood pressure, and blood flow to active
muscles.
During a set of resistance exercise, stroke volume and cardiac
output increase mostly during the eccentric phase of each repetition,
especially when the Valsalva technique is used (see chapter 2) (11).
Because the concentric phase of a repetition is much more difficult
and elevations in intrathoracic and intra-abdominal pressures are
more prominent (via the Valsalva maneuver), limiting venous return
and reducing end-diastolic volume, the hemodynamic response of
resistance exercise is delayed such that cardiac output increases
more during rest periods between sets. This is especially true for an
individual’s heart rate response; during the first 5 seconds after
completion of a set, heart rate is higher than during the set itself
(35).
The degree to which blood flow is increased in the working
muscles during anaerobic training is dependent on several factors,
including the intensity of resistance, the length of time of the effort
(i.e., the number of repetitions performed), and the size of the
muscle mass activated. When lower resistances are lifted for several
repetitions, the responses are relatively similar to those observed
during aerobic exercise (15). However, heavy resistance exercise
transiently decreases blood flow to the working muscles because of
contracted muscle tissue impinging on capillaries and creating a
localized occlusion. Muscular contractions greater than 20% of
maximal voluntary contraction impede peripheral blood flow within
the muscle during a set, but blood flow increases during the
subsequent rest period (reactive hyperemia) (25). Interestingly,
the lack of blood flow (and subsequent increase in metabolites such
as hydrogen ions and reduction in pH) during heavy external loading
is a potent stimulus for muscle growth (39). Overall, the magnitude
of the acute cardiovascular responses depends on the intensity and
96

volume of exercise, muscle mass involvement, rest period length,
and contraction velocity (24, 35).
Ventilatory Response to Anaerobic
Exercise
Ventilation rate generally does not limit resistance exercise and is
either unaffected or only moderately improved by anaerobic training.
With resistance exercise, ventilation is significantly elevated during
each set, but the elevation is even greater during the first minute of
recovery (35). Ventilation rates of more than 60 L/min have been
reported (35), and the rest interval length had a large effect such
that short rest intervals (30 s to 1 min) produced the most
substantial elevation. Training adaptations include increased tidal
volume and breathing frequency with maximal exercise. With
submaximal activity, however, breathing frequency is often reduced
while tidal volume is increased. It appears that such ventilatory
adaptations result from local, neural, or chemical adaptations in the
specific muscles trained through exercise (3). Additionally, improved
ventilation efficiency, as characterized by reduced ventilatory
equivalent for oxygen (the ratio of air ventilated to oxygen used by
the tissues, V̇E/V̇O2), is observed in trained versus untrained
individuals (3).
97

Conclusion
Knowledge of musculoskeletal, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, and
respiratory anatomy and physiology is important for the strength and
conditioning professional to better understand the scientific basis for
conditioning. This includes knowledge of the function of the
macrostructure and microstructure of the skeleton and muscle fibers,
muscle fiber types, and interactions between tendon and muscle and
between the motor unit and its activation, as well as the interactions
of the heart, vascular system, lungs, and respiratory system. This
information is necessary for developing training strategies that will
meet the specific needs of the athlete.
KEY TERMS
A-band
acetylcholine
actin
action potential
all-or-none principle
alveolar pressure
alveoli
anatomical dead space
aortic valve
appendicular skeleton
arterial system
arteriole
artery
arteriovenous oxygen difference
atrioventricular (AV) bundle
atrioventricular (AV) node
atrioventricular (AV) valves
atrium
axial skeleton
98

biaxial joints
bone periosteum
bradycardia
bronchi
bronchiole
capillary
cardiac output
cartilaginous joints
crossbridge
crossbridge cycling
depolarization
diastole
diastolic blood pressure
diffusion
distal
double product
ejection fraction
electrocardiogram (ECG)
end-diastolic volume
endomysium
epimysium
extrafusal fibers
fasciculi
fast-twitch fiber
fibrous joints
Fick equation
Frank-Starling mechanism
fused tetanic contraction
Golgi tendon organ (GTO)
heart rate
hemoglobin
hyaline cartilage
H-zone
I-band
99

inferior
intrafusal fibers
left bundle branch
maximal heart rate
maximal oxygen uptake
mean arterial pressure
metabolic equivalent (MET)
minute ventilation
mitral valve
motor neuron
motor unit
multiaxial joints
muscle fiber
muscle spindle
myocardium
myofiber
myofibril
myofilament
myosin
myosin adenosine triphosphatase
neuromuscular junction
oxygen uptake
parasympathetic nervous system
perimysium
physiological dead space
pleura
pleural pressure
power stroke
proprioceptor
proximal
pulmonary valve
Purkinje fibers
P-wave
QRS complex
100

rate–pressure product
reactive hyperemia
red blood cell
repolarization
right bundle branch
sarcolemma
sarcomere
sarcoplasm
sarcoplasmic reticulum
semilunar valves
sinoatrial (SA) node
sliding-filament theory
slow-twitch fiber
stroke volume
superior
sympathetic nervous system
synovial fluid
synovial joints
systole
systolic blood pressure
tachycardia
tendon
tidal volume
trachea
tricuspid valve
tropomyosin
troponin
T-wave
twitch
type I fiber
type IIa fiber
type IIx fiber
unfused tetanic contraction
uniaxial joints
101

vasoconstriction
vasodilation
vein
venous return
venous system
ventilatory equivalent
ventricle
venule
vertebral column
Z-line
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Based on the sliding-filament theory, which of the following
two substances are needed inside of muscle fibers for muscle
contraction to occur?
  a.  sodium and fatty acids
  b.  calcium and ATP
  c.  ADP and Pi
  d.  calcium and iron
  2.  Which of the following is an accurate description of a motor
unit?
  a.  a muscle fiber and all of the motor neurons innervating it
  b.  an upper and lower motor neuron
  c.  a motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers it innervates
  d.  a muscle fiber and all of the myofibrils within it
  3.  Maximal oxygen uptake is most influenced by which of the
following?
  a.  the percentage of type I versus type II fibers in an
individual’s leg muscles
  b.  total blood volume
  c.  age-predicted maximal heart rate
  d.  the ability of the heart and circulatory system to transport
oxygen
102

  4.  Which of the following respiratory responses occur during an
aerobic training bout?
  a.  decreased tidal volume
  b.  decreased physiological dead space
  c.  increased minute ventilation
  d.  decreased motor unit activation of respiratory muscles
  5.  Which cardiovascular response does not occur during a
resistance exercise bout?
  a.  decreased heart rate
  b.  increased stroke volume
  c.  increased cardiac output
  d.  increased blood pressure
103
