CHAPTER 3
BIOENERGETICS OF
EXERCISE AND TRAINING
Dale W. Chapman, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Trent J. Herda and
Joel T. Cramer to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the basic energy systems available to supply ATP during
exercise;
understand lactate accumulation, metabolic acidosis, and
cellular manifestations of fatigue;
identify patterns of substrate depletion and repletion during
various exercise intensities;
describe the bioenergetic factors that limit exercise
performance;
critique training programs based on the metabolic specificity of
training; and
explain the metabolic demands of and recovery from interval
training, high-intensity interval training, and combination
training to optimize work-to-rest ratios.
Metabolic specificity of exercise and training is based on an
understanding of the transfer of energy in biological systems.
174

Through an understanding of how energy transfer occurs, more
efficient and productive training programs can be designed. After
defining essential bioenergetics terminology and explaining the role
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), this chapter discusses the three
basic energy systems that work to replenish ATP in human skeletal
muscle. Then we look at substrate depletion and repletion, especially
as they relate to fatigue and recovery; bioenergetic factors that limit
performance; and aerobic and anaerobic contributions to oxygen
uptake. Finally, the metabolic specificity of training is discussed.
175

Essential Terminology
Bioenergetics, or the flow of energy in a biological system,
concerns primarily the conversion of macronutrients—carbohydrate,
protein, and fats, which contain chemical energy—into biologically
usable forms of energy. It is the breakdown of the chemical bonds in
these macronutrients that provides the energy necessary to perform
biological work.
The breakdown of large molecules into smaller molecules,
associated with the release of energy, is termed catabolism. The
synthesis of larger molecules from smaller molecules can be
accomplished using the energy released from catabolic reactions;
this building-up process is termed anabolism. The breakdown of
protein into amino acids is an example of catabolism, while the
formation of proteins from amino acids is an anabolic process.
Exergonic reactions are energy-releasing reactions and are
generally catabolic. Endergonic reactions require energy and
include anabolic processes and the contraction of muscle.
Metabolism is the sum of all catabolic or exergonic and anabolic or
endergonic reactions in a biological system. Energy derived from
catabolic or exergonic reactions is used to drive anabolic or
endergonic reactions through an intermediate molecule, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). ATP allows the transfer of energy from
exergonic to endergonic reactions. Thus, exergonic (i.e., energy-
releasing) reactions are coupled with endergonic (i.e., energy-
requiring) reactions, based on the production or breakdown of ATP,
respectively. Without an adequate supply of ATP, muscular activity
and muscle growth would not be possible because the process
reflects the metabolic system’s current ability to supply the demand
of the required activity. Thus, when an exercise steady state is
achieved, ATP supply meets ATP demand. However, fatigue results
when ATP supply does not meet the ATP requirements demanded by
a given activity. Following a period of appropriate conditioning, the
metabolic systems of the body adapt to be better able to supply the
176

ATP to meet the ATP demand of the same activity that once resulted
in fatigue. It is important to note that the nature of the activity has
not changed, but the metabolic system’s capacity to do the activity
changes with training. Thus, when designing training programs,
strength and conditioning professionals need to have a basic
understanding of how exercise affects ATP hydrolysis and
resynthesis.
Adenosine triphosphate is composed of adenosine and three
phosphate groups (figure 3.1). Adenosine is the combination of
adenine (a nitrogen-containing base) and ribose (a five-carbon
sugar). The breakdown of one molecule of ATP to yield energy is
known as hydrolysis, because it requires one molecule of water.
The hydrolysis of ATP is catalyzed by the presence of an enzyme
called adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase). Specifically, myosin
ATPase is the enzyme that catalyzes ATP hydrolysis for crossbridge
recycling. Other specific enzymes hydrolyze ATP at other locations,
such as calcium ATPase for pumping calcium into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (following muscle contraction) and sodium-potassium
ATPase for maintaining the sarcolemmal concentration gradient
after depolarization (59). The following equation depicts the
reactants (left), enzyme (middle), and products (right) of ATP
hydrolysis:
 ATP +H2 O↔ATPase ADP +Pi +H+ +Energy     (3.1)
where ADP represents adenosine diphosphate (only two
phosphate groups, figure 3.1), Pi is an inorganic phosphate
molecule, and H+ is a hydrogen ion (proton). Further hydrolysis of
ADP cleaves the second phosphate group and yields adenosine
monophosphate (AMP). The energy released primarily from the
hydrolysis of ATP and secondarily from ADP results in biological
work.
ATP is classified as a high-energy molecule because it stores large
amounts of energy in the chemical bonds of the two terminal
phosphate groups. Because muscle cells store ATP only in limited
amounts and activity requires a constant supply of ATP to provide
177

the energy needed for muscle actions, ATP-producing processes
must occur in the cell.
178

Biological Energy Systems
Three basic energy systems exist in mammalian muscle cells to
replenish ATP (87, 124):
Phosphagen
Glycolytic
Oxidative
In discussion of exercise-related bioenergetics, the terms
anaerobic and aerobic metabolism are often used. Anaerobic
processes do not require the presence of oxygen, whereas aerobic
mechanisms depend on oxygen. The phosphagen and glycolytic
systems are anaerobic mechanisms that occur in the sarcoplasm of
a muscle cell. The Krebs cycle, electron transport, and the rest of
the oxidative system are aerobic mechanisms that occur in the
mitochondria of muscle cells and require oxygen as the terminal
electron acceptor.
Of the three main macronutrients—carbohydrate, protein, and
fats—only carbohydrate can be metabolized for energy without the
direct involvement of oxygen (21). Therefore, carbohydrate is critical
during anaerobic metabolism. All three energy systems are active at
any given time; however, the magnitude of the contribution of each
system to overall work performance is primarily dependent on the
intensity of the activity and secondarily on the duration (45, 87).
Energy stored in the chemical bonds of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) is used to power muscular activity.
The replenishment of ATP in human skeletal muscle is
accomplished by three basic energy systems: (a)
phosphagen, (b) glycolytic, and (c) oxidative. The first
few seconds of activity are supplied by ATP stores
before these metabolic energy systems begin the
process of replenishing ATP stores and meeting the
activity demands.
179

Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system provides ATP primarily for short-term, high-
intensity activities (e.g., resistance training and sprinting) and is
highly active at the start of all exercise regardless of intensity (62,
70, 155). This energy system relies on the hydrolysis of ATP
(equation 3.1) and breakdown of another high-energy phosphate
molecule 
called 
creatine 
phosphate 
(CP), 
also 
called
phosphocreatine (PCr). Creatine kinase is the enzyme that
catalyzes the synthesis of ATP from CP and ADP in the following
reaction:
 ADP + CP ↔Creatine kinase  ATP + Creatine  (3.2)
180

FIGURE 3.1 (a) The chemical structure of an ATP molecule showing adenosine (adenine
+ ribose), the triphosphate group, and locations of the high-energy chemical bonds. (b)
The hydrolysis of ATP breaks the terminal phosphate bond, releases energy, and leaves
ADP, a Pi, and a hydrogen ion (H+). (c) The hydrolysis of ADP breaks the terminal
phosphate bond, releases energy, and leaves AMP, Pi, and H+.
181

CP supplies a phosphate group that combines with ADP to
replenish ATP. The creatine kinase reaction provides energy at a high
rate; however, because CP is stored in relatively small amounts, the
phosphagen system cannot be the primary supplier of energy for
continuous, long-duration activities (30).
ATP Stores
The body stores approximately 80 to 100 grams (about 3 oz) of ATP
at any given time, which does not represent a significant energy
reserve for exercise (109). In addition, ATP stores cannot be
completely depleted due to the necessity for basic cellular function.
In fact, ATP concentrations may only decrease by up to 50% to 60%
(34, 71, 102, 145) of the pre-exercise levels during experimentally
induced muscle fatigue. Therefore, the phosphagen system uses the
creatine kinase reaction (equation 3.2) to maintain the ATP
concentration. 
Under 
normal 
circumstances, 
skeletal 
muscle
concentrations of CP are four to six times higher than ATP
concentrations (109). Therefore, the phosphagen system, through
CP and the creatine kinase reaction, serves as an energy reserve for
rapidly replenishing ATP. In addition, type II (fast-twitch) muscle
fibers contain higher concentrations of CP than type I (slow-twitch)
fibers (95, 134); thus, individuals with higher percentages of type II
fibers may be able to replenish ATP more quickly through the
phosphagen system during anaerobic, explosive exercise.
Another important single-enzyme reaction that can rapidly
replenish ATP is the adenylate kinase (also called myokinase)
reaction:
2ADP↔Adenylate kinaseATP +AMP    (3.3)
This reaction is particularly important because AMP, a product of the
adenylate kinase (myokinase) reaction, is a powerful stimulant of
glycolysis (22, 28).
182

Control of the Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system reactions (often represented by equations
3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) are largely controlled by the law of mass action
or the mass action effect (109). The law of mass action states
that the concentrations of reactants or products (or both) in solution
will drive the direction of the reactions. With enzyme-mediated
reactions, such as the reactions of the phosphagen system, the rate
of product formation is greatly influenced by the reactant
concentrations. This is denoted in equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 by the
two-way arrow between reactants and products. For example, as
ATP is hydrolyzed to yield the energy necessary for exercise
(equation 3.1), there is a transient increase in ADP concentrations
(as well as Pi) in the sarcolemma. This will increase the rate of
creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reaction (equations 3.2 and
3.3) to replenish the ATP supply. The process will continue until the
exercise ceases or the intensity reduces such that it does not deplete
CP stores and thus glycolysis or the oxidative system can become
the primary supplier of ATP and rephosphorylate the free creatine
(equation 3.2) (37). At this point, the sarcoplasmic concentration of
ATP will remain steady or increase, which will slow down or reverse
the directions of the creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reactions.
As a result, equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 are often referred to as
near-equilibrium reactions that proceed in a direction dictated by
the concentrations of the reactants due to the law of mass action.
Glycolytic System
Glycolysis is the breakdown of carbohydrate—either as glycogen
stored in the muscle or glucose delivered via the blood—to
resynthesize ATP (22, 145). The process of glycolysis involves
multiple enzymatically catalyzed reactions (figure 3.2). As a result,
the ATP resynthesis rate during glycolysis is not as rapid as with the
single-step phosphagen system; however, the capacity to produce
ATP is much higher due to a larger supply of glycogen and glucose
183

compared to CP. As with the phosphagen system, glycolysis occurs in
the sarcoplasm.
As depicted in figure 3.2, pyruvate, the end result of glycolysis,
may proceed in one of two directions:
1. Pyruvate can be converted to lactate in the sarcoplasm.
2. Pyruvate can be shuttled into the mitochondria.
When pyruvate is converted to lactate, ATP resynthesis occurs at
a faster rate via the rapid regeneration of NAD+ but is limited in
duration due to subsequent H+ production resulting in decreased
cytosolic pH. However, the excess H+ does not primarily result from
the rapid hydrolysis of ATP during the conversion of pyruvate to
lactate; it is the breakdown of ATP to ADP and Pi, which releases H+
ions. The conversion process of pyruvate to lactate is often called
anaerobic glycolysis (or fast glycolysis). However, when
pyruvate is shuttled into the mitochondria to undergo the Krebs
cycle, the ATP resynthesis rate is slower because of the numerous
reactions but can occur for a longer duration if the exercise intensity
is low enough. This process is often referred to as aerobic
glycolysis (or slow glycolysis). At higher exercise intensities,
pyruvate and NADH will increase above what can be handled by
pyruvate dehydrogenase and will then be converted into lactate and
NAD+. Unfortunately, because glycolysis itself does not depend on
oxygen, the terms anaerobic and aerobic (or fast and slow,
respectively) glycolysis are probably not practical for describing the
processes. Nevertheless, the fate of pyruvate is ultimately controlled
by the energy demands within the cell. If energy demand is high and
must be transferred quickly, as in resistance training, pyruvate is
primarily converted to lactate in support of anaerobic glycolysis. If
energy demand is not as high and oxygen is present in sufficient
quantities in the cell, pyruvate can be further oxidized in the
mitochondria.
184

FIGURE 3.2 Glycolysis. ADP = adenosine diphosphate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate;
NAD+, NADH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Glycolysis and the Formation of Lactate
The formation of lactate from pyruvate is catalyzed by the enzyme
lactate dehydrogenase. Sometimes, mistakenly, the end result of this
reaction is said to be the formation of lactic acid. However, due to
the physiological pH (i.e., near 7) and earlier steps in glycolysis that
185

consume protons (125), lactate—rather than lactic acid—is the
product of the lactate dehydrogenase reaction. Although the
muscular fatigue experienced during exercise often correlates with
high tissue concentrations of lactate, lactate is not the cause of
fatigue (22, 27, 125). Proton (H+) accumulation during fatigue
reduces the intracellular pH, inhibits glycolytic reactions, and directly
interferes with muscle’s excitation–contraction coupling—possibly by
inhibiting calcium binding to troponin (57, 115) or by interfering with
crossbridge recycling (51, 57, 79, 115, 146). Also, the decrease in
pH inhibits the enzymatic turnover rate of the cell’s energy systems
(9, 78). Overall, this process of an exercise-induced decrease in pH
is referred to as metabolic acidosis (125), and may be responsible
for much of the peripheral fatigue that occurs during exercise (42,
156). Also, the role of metabolic acidosis in peripheral fatigue has
been questioned (130), and other factors have been reported to play
a prominent role in peripheral fatigue, such as an increased
interstitial K+ concentration and Pi that impairs Ca++ release (120,
139). However, evidence suggests that other mechanisms, such as
the simple hydrolysis of ATP (125) (equation 3.1), are responsible for
most of the H+ accumulation and that lactate itself actually works to
decrease metabolic acidosis rather than accelerate it (27, 125). See
the sidebar Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabolic Acidosis. In fact,
lactate is often used as an energy substrate, especially in type I
and cardiac muscle fibers (10, 108, 162). It is also used in
gluconeogenesis (i.e., the Cori cycle)—the formation of glucose
from noncarbohydrate sources, lactate in this case—during extended
exercise and recovery (19, 108).
Normally, blood and muscle have a low concentration of lactate.
The reported normal range of lactate concentration in blood is 0.5 to
2.2 mmol/L at rest (67) and 0.5 to 2.2 mmol for each kilogram of
wet muscle (muscle that has not been desiccated) (67). Lactate
production increases with exercise intensity (67, 129) and appears to
depend on muscle fiber type. Researchers have reported that the
maximal rate of lactate production for type II muscle fibers is 0.5
186

mmol · g−1 · s−1 (46, 107) and for type I muscle is 0.25 mmol · g−1 ·
s−1 (113). The higher rate of lactate production by type II muscle
fibers may reflect a higher concentration or activity of glycolytic
enzymes than in type I muscle fibers (10, 122). Although the highest
possible concentration of lactate accumulation is not known, severe
fatigue may occur at blood concentrations between 20 and 25
mmol/L (107); one study, however, showed blood lactate
concentrations greater than 30 mmol/L following multiple bouts of
dynamic exercise (79). Along with exercise intensity and muscle fiber
type, exercise duration (67), state of training (66), and initial
glycogen levels (67) can also influence lactate accumulation.
Blood lactate concentrations reflect the net balance of lactate
production versus clearance as a result of bicarbonate (HCO3−)
buffering. HCO3− minimizes the disrupting influence of the H+ on pH
by accepting a proton (H+) and becoming carbonic acid (H2CO3).
Carbonic acid then dissociates to H2O and CO2 in the lungs, where
the CO2 is exhaled. The clearance and buffering of lactate from the
blood reflects a return to homeostatic resting level. Lactate can be
cleared by oxidation within the muscle fiber in which it was
produced, or it can be transported in the blood to other muscle
fibers to be oxidized (108). Lactate can also be transported in the
blood to the liver, where it is converted to glucose. This process is
referred to as the Cori cycle and is depicted in figure 3.3.
Gollnick and colleagues (67) and others (8, 72, 118) have
reported that blood lactate concentrations normally return to pre-
exercise values within an hour after activity, depending on the
duration and intensity of exercise, training status, and type of
recovery (i.e., passive versus active). Light activity during the
postexercise period has been shown to increase lactate clearance
rates (55, 67, 72, 80, 118). For example, an active recovery
following a 200-yard (182.9 m) maximal-effort swim resulted in the
greatest lactate clearance in comparison to a passive recovery in
competitive swimmers (72). In addition, both aerobically trained (67)
and anaerobically trained (62) athletes have faster lactate clearance
187

rates than untrained people. Peak blood lactate concentrations occur
approximately 5 minutes after the cessation of exercise (67), a delay
frequently attributed to the time required to buffer and transport
lactate from the tissue to the blood (95). Hence, lactate clearance
should be recognized positively as an indirect marker for recovery
from metabolic acidosis as the system returns to metabolic
homeostasis and not as waste product of metabolism.
FIGURE 3.3 The Cori cycle.
Blood lactate accumulation is greater following high-intensity,
intermittent exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprints) than
following lower-intensity, continuous exercise (79, 103, 152).
However, 
trained 
people 
experience 
lower 
blood 
lactate
concentrations than untrained people when exercising at an absolute
workload (same resistance) (66, 90, 143). This indicates that
resistance training results in alterations in lactate response similar to
those from aerobic endurance training (67, 91, 143). These
alterations include a lower blood lactate concentration at a given
workload 
in 
trained 
individuals 
and 
higher 
blood 
lactate
concentrations in trained individuals during maximal exercise (67, 90,
143).
188

The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is converted to
lactate may be summarized as follows:
Glucose + 2Pi + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2ATP + H2O   (3.4)
Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabolic
Acidosis
Lactic acidosis is a common misnomer, because lactic acid is inaccurately believed
to cause the burning sensations experienced with muscle fatigue during high-
intensity exercise. This is based on the assumption that there is an immediate
dissociation of lactic acid into lactate and H+ when produced by glycolysis in
skeletal muscle (1, 60, 125). However, the phosphoglycerate kinase reaction of
glycolysis involves the transfer of a phosphate leaving a carboxylate (COO−) group
(105). Thus, as shown in figure 3.4, no proton (H+) exists to dissociate from
lactate (60, 125).
Figure 3.4 The phosphoglycerate kinase reaction of glycolysis, illustrating
that there is no proton (H+) to dissociate from lactate.
Furthermore, the lactate dehydrogenase reaction itself consumes protons, which
alkalizes the cell (60, 125)—quite the opposite of acidosis. In fact, Busa and
Nuccitelli (27) stated, “ATP hydrolysis, not lactate accumulation, is the dominant
source of the intracellular acid load …” (p. 430). The take-home message from
Robergs and colleagues (125) is that the hydrolysis of ATP outside the
mitochondria is primarily responsible for the proton (H+) accumulation during
exercise-induced metabolic acidosis—not the conversion of pyruvate to lactate as is
commonly believed. Consequently, the term lactic acidosis is indeed a misnomer,
and the term metabolic acidosis is recommended to describe the reduced pH
within skeletal muscle during high-intensity, fatiguing exercise.
189

Glycolysis Leading to the Krebs Cycle
If oxygen is present in sufficient quantities in the mitochondria
(specialized cellular organelles where the reactions of aerobic
metabolism occur), the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not
converted to lactate but is transported into the mitochondria. Also
transported are two molecules of reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide 
(NADH) produced during glycolytic reactions
(reduced refers to the added hydrogen). When pyruvate enters the
mitochondria, it is converted to acetyl-CoA (CoA stands for
coenzyme A) by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, resulting in
the loss of a carbon as CO2. Acetyl-CoA can then enter the Krebs
cycle for further ATP resynthesis. The NADH molecules drop off H+ at
the electron transport chain, where they can also be used to
resynthesize ATP.
The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is shuttled to the
mitochondria may be summarized as follows:
Glucose + 2Pi + 2ADP + 2NAD+ → 2Pyruvate + 2ATP + 2NADH + 2H2O    
(3.5)
Energy Yield of Glycolysis
There are two primary mechanisms for resynthesizing ATP during
metabolism:
1. Substrate-level phosphorylation
2. Oxidative phosphorylation
Phosphorylation is the process of adding a Pi to another
molecule. For example, ADP + Pi → ATP is the phosphorylation of
ADP to ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation refers to the resynthesis
of ATP in the electron transport chain (ETC). In contrast,
substrate-level phosphorylation refers to the direct resynthesis
of ATP from ADP during a single reaction in the metabolic pathways.
To illustrate, in glycolysis two reactions result in substrate-level
phosphorylation of ADP to ATP (42):
190

         1,3-bisphosphoglycerate + ADP + P i→Phosphoglycerate kinase  3-
phosphoglycerate + ATP  (3.6)
Phosphoenolpyruvate + ADP++ Pi→Pyruvate kinasePyruvate + ATP  (3.7)
The gross number of ATP molecules that are resynthesized as a
result of substrate-level phosphorylation during glycolysis is four
(figure 3.2, page 57). However, the reaction that converts fructose-
6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (catalyzed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase [PFK]) in glycolysis requires the hydrolysis
of one ATP molecule. In addition, there are two possible sources of
glucose: blood glucose and muscle glycogen. When blood glucose
enters the muscle cell, it must be phosphorylated to remain in the
cell and to maintain the glucose concentration gradient (67). The
phosphorylation of one molecule of blood glucose, which is catalyzed
by hexokinase, also requires the hydrolysis of one ATP. In contrast,
when muscle glycogen is broken down (i.e., glycogenolysis) to
glucose with the help of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, the
glucose is already phosphorylated, and it does not require the
hydrolysis of ATP. The bottom line is that when glycolysis begins with
one molecule of blood glucose, two ATP molecules are used and four
ATP are resynthesized, which results in a net resynthesis of two ATP
molecules. When glycolysis begins from muscle glycogen, only one
ATP is used and four ATP are resynthesized, which yields a net
resynthesis of three ATP molecules. The net yield rate of ATP
resynthesis highlights the role and importance of maintaining muscle
glycogen stores through proper nutrition.
Control of Glycolysis
In general, the rate of glycolysis is stimulated to increase during
intense muscle actions by high concentrations of ADP, Pi, and
ammonia and by a slight decrease in pH and AMP (22, 61, 142), all
of which are signs of increased ATP hydrolysis and a need for
energy. In contrast, glycolysis is inhibited by markedly lower pH,
ATP, CP, citrate, and increased free fatty acids (22), which are
usually present at rest. (Note that a slight decrease in pH increases
191

glycolysis, but if pH continues to decrease significantly it will inhibit
the rate of glycolysis.) However, the regulation of glycolysis (109) is
more specifically influenced by the concentrations and turnover rates
of three crucial glycolytic enzymes: hexokinase, PFK, and pyruvate
kinase. All three are regulatory enzymes in glycolysis, because each
has important allosteric (meaning “other site”) binding sites.
Allosteric regulation occurs when the end product of a reaction or
series of reactions feeds back to regulate the turnover rate of key
enzymes in the metabolic pathways. Consequently, this process is
also called end product regulation (87) or feedback regulation (61).
Allosteric inhibition occurs when an end product binds to the
regulatory enzyme and decreases its turnover rate and slows
product formation. In contrast, allosteric activation occurs when
an “activator” binds with the enzyme and increases its turnover rate.
Hexokinase, which catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate, is allosterically inhibited by the concentration
of glucose-6-phosphate in the sarcoplasm (61). Thus, the higher the
concentration of glucose-6-phosphate, the more hexokinase will be
inhibited. In addition, the phosphorylation of glucose commits it to
the cell so that it cannot leave. Similarly, the PFK reaction (fructose-
6-phosphate → fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) commits the cell to
metabolizing 
glucose 
rather 
than 
storing 
it 
as 
glycogen.
Phosphofructokinase is the most important regulator of glycolysis
even though it is the slowest reaction of the steps that makes up
glycolysis because it is the bottleneck, or the rate-limiting step.
ATP is an allosteric inhibitor of PFK; therefore, as intracellular ATP
concentrations rise, PFK activity decreases and reduces the
conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
and, subsequently, decreases activity of the glycolytic pathway.
However, AMP is an allosteric activator of PFK and a powerful
stimulator of glycolysis. Moreover, the ammonia produced during
high-intensity exercise as a result of AMP or amino acid deamination
(removing the amine group from the amino acid molecule) can also
stimulate PFK. Pyruvate kinase catalyzes the conversion of
192

phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate and is the final regulatory enzyme.
Pyruvate kinase is allosterically inhibited by ATP and acetyl-CoA (the
latter is a Krebs cycle intermediate) and activated by high
concentrations of AMP and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (61).
Lactate Threshold and Onset of Blood Lactate
Accumulation
As exercise intensity increases, specific break points are evident in
the lactate accumulation curve (figure 3.5), indirectly representing
the change in metabolic acidosis (39, 99). The exercise intensity or
relative intensity at which blood lactate begins an abrupt increase
above the baseline concentration has been termed the lactate
threshold (LT) or (LT1) (163). The LT represents a significantly
increased reliance on the glycolytic pathway for energy production to
meet demand. The LT corresponds well with the ventilatory
threshold (breaking point in the relationship between ventilation and
V̇O2) and is often used as a marker of the anaerobic threshold.
The LT typically begins at 50% to 60% of maximal oxygen
uptake in untrained individuals and at 70% to 80% in aerobically
trained athletes (29, 52). A second exponential increase in the rate
of lactate accumulation has been noted at higher relative intensities
of exercise. This second point of inflection has been termed the
onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA) or lactate
threshold (LT2) and occurs approximately when the concentration
of blood lactate reaches 4 mmol/L (85, 138, 144). Alternatively, the
LT2 threshold can be calculated, with the Dmax modified method
reported to have the highest repeatability (81). The breaks in the
lactate accumulation curve may correspond to the points at which
intermediate and large motor units are recruited during increasing
exercise intensities (94). The muscle cells associated with large
motor units are typically type II fibers, which are particularly suited
for anaerobic metabolism and lactate production.
193

FIGURE 3.5 Lactate threshold (LT) and onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA).
Reprinted by permission from T.O. Bompa and G.G. Haff, Periodization: Theory and Methodology of Training, 5th ed.
(Human Kinetics, 2009), 295.
Some studies suggest that training at intensities near or above
the LT or OBLA pushes the LT and OBLA to the right (i.e., lactate
accumulation occurs later at a higher exercise intensity) (39, 43).
This shift probably occurs as a result of changes in hormone release,
particularly reduced catecholamine release at high exercise
intensities, and increased mitochondrial content that allows for
greater production of ATP through aerobic mechanisms. Broadly, the
training-induced adaptations result in the athlete being able to rely
more on free fatty acids to meet the ATP demands of the exercise
task. Thus shifting the LT or OBLA to the right allows the athlete to
perform at higher percentages of maximal oxygen uptake without as
194

much lactate accumulation (change in metabolic acidosis) in the
blood (22, 41).
The Oxidative (Aerobic) System
The oxidative system, the primary source of ATP at rest and during
low-intensity activities, uses primarily carbohydrate and fats as
substrates (62). Protein does not provide a significant contribution to
total energy; however, the use of protein does significantly increase
during long-term starvation and long bouts (>90 min) of exercise
(41, 104). At rest, approximately 70% of the ATP produced is
derived from fats and 30% from carbohydrate. Following the onset
of activity, as the intensity of the exercise increases, there is a shift
in substrate preference from fats to carbohydrate. During high-
intensity aerobic exercise, almost 100% of energy is derived from
carbohydrate if an adequate supply is available, with only minimal
contributions from fats and protein. However, during prolonged,
submaximal, steady-state work, there is a gradual shift from
carbohydrate back to fats (due to glycogen depletion), and to a very
small extent protein, as energy substrates (22).
Glucose and Glycogen Oxidation
The oxidative metabolism of blood glucose and muscle glycogen
begins with glycolysis. If oxygen is present in sufficient quantities,
the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not converted to lactate
but is transported to the mitochondria, where it is converted to
acetyl-CoA (a two-carbon molecule), which enters the Krebs cycle,
also known as the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle (7, 61).
The Krebs cycle is a series of reactions that continues the oxidation
of the substrate from glycolysis and produces two ATP indirectly
from 
guanine 
triphosphate 
(GTP), 
via 
substrate-level
phosphorylation, for each molecule of glucose (figure 3.6).
195

FIGURE 3.6 The Krebs cycle. CoA = coenzyme A; FAD2+, FADH, FADH2 = flavin adenine
dinucleotide; GDP = guanine diphosphate; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NAD+, NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Also produced from the two pyruvate molecules subsequent to
the production of one molecule of glucose are six molecules of
NADH + H+ and two molecules of reduced flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FADH2). These molecules transport hydrogen atoms
to the ETC to be used to produce ATP from ADP (22, 109). The ETC
uses the NADH + H+ and FADH2 molecules to rephosphorylate ADP
to ATP (figure 3.7).
196

FIGURE 3.7 The electron transport chain (ETC). CoQ = coenzyme Q; Cyt = cytochrome.
The hydrogen atoms are passed down the chain (a series of
electron carriers known as cytochromes) to form a proton
concentration gradient, which provides the energy for ATP
production, with oxygen serving as the final electron acceptor
(resulting in the formation of water). Due to NADH + H+ and FADH2
entering the ETC at different sites, they differ in the amount of ATP
produced. One molecule of NADH can produce 2.5 molecules of ATP,
whereas one molecule of FADH2 can only produce 1.5 molecules of
ATP (however, traditional biochemistry often cites that NADH yields 3
ATP and FADH2 yields 2 ATP [34a]). The production of ATP during
this process is referred to as oxidative phosphorylation. The
oxidative system, beginning with glycolysis and including the Krebs
cycle and ETC, results in the production of approximately 32 ATP
from the degradation of one molecule of blood glucose (12a, 117a).
However, if the initiation of glycolysis is muscle glycogen, the net
ATP production is slightly higher at 34 ATP, using the malate-
aspartate shuttle system or 32 ATP using the glycerol 3-phosphate
shuttle system because the first ATP consuming step in glycolysis is
bypassed (12a, 117a). Nevertheless, oxidative phosphorylation
accounts for over 90% of ATP synthesis compared to substrate-level
phosphorylation, which demonstrates the capacity of energy transfer
by the oxidative system. See table 3.1 for a summary of these
processes.
TABLE 3.1 Total Energy Yield From the Oxidation of
One Glucose Molecule
Process
Net ATP production
197

Process
Net ATP production
GLYCOLYSIS
Substrate-level phosphorylation (4 ATP produced / 2 ATP
consumed)
2*
Oxidative phosphorylation:
2 NADH (2.5 ATP each)
5
PYRUVATE OXIDATION
2 NADH (2.5 ATP each)
5
KREBS CYCLE (2 ROTATIONS THROUGH THE KREBS CYCLE PER GLUCOSE)
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
Oxidative phosphorylation:
6 NADH (2.5 ATP each)
15
Via GTP:
2 FADH2 (1.5 ATP each)
3
TOTAL
32
*Glycolysis consumes 2 ATP (if starting with blood glucose), so net ATP production is 34 −
2 = 32. This figure may also be reported as 30 ATP or as high as 36 depending on which
shuttle system is used to transport the NADH to the mitochondria. ATP = adenosine
triphosphate; FADH2 = flavin adenine dinucleotide; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Fat Oxidation
The oxidative energy system can alternatively use fats. Triglycerides
stored in fat cells can be broken down by an enzyme, hormone-
sensitive lipase, to produce free fatty acids and glycerol. The
breakdown releases a portion of the total free fatty acids from the
fat cells into the blood, where they can circulate and enter muscle
fibers and undergo oxidation (89, 123). Additionally, limited
quantities of triglycerides are stored within the muscle along with a
form of hormone-sensitive lipase to produce an intramuscular source
of free fatty acids (22, 47). Free fatty acids enter the mitochondria,
where they undergo beta oxidation, a series of reactions in which
the free fatty acids are broken down, resulting in the formation of
198

acetyl-CoA and hydrogen protons (figure 3.6). The acetyl-CoA is a
common intermediary entering the Krebs cycle directly, and the
hydrogen atoms are carried by NADH + H+ and FADH2 to the ETC
(12a, 117a). The result is hundreds of ATP molecules supplied by
beta oxidation. For example, the breakdown of a single triglyceride
molecule containing three 16-carbon chain free fatty acids (palmitic
acid) can be metabolized by beta oxidation to yield over 300 ATP
molecules (>100 ATP per palmitic acid). The overarching concept is
that fat oxidation is capable of a tremendous capacity for ATP
synthesis compared to carbohydrate and protein oxidation.
Protein Oxidation
Although not a significant source of energy for most activities,
protein can be broken down into its constituent amino acids by
various metabolic processes. Most of these amino acids can then be
converted into glucose (in a process known as gluconeogenesis),
pyruvate, or various Krebs cycle intermediates to produce ATP
(figure 3.6). The contribution of amino acids to the production of
ATP has been estimated to be minimal during short-term exercise
but may contribute 3% to 18% of the energy requirements during
prolonged activity (20, 140). The major amino acids that are
oxidized in skeletal muscle are believed to be the branched-chain
amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine), although alanine,
aspartate, and glutamate may also be used (69). The nitrogenous
waste products of amino acid degradation are eliminated through
the formation of urea and small amounts of ammonia (22). The
elimination through formation of ammonia is significant because
ammonia is toxic and is associated with fatigue.
Control of the Oxidative (Aerobic) System
The rate-limiting step (i.e., the slowest reaction) in the Krebs cycle
(figure 3.6) is the conversion of isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate, a
reaction catalyzed by the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase.
Isocitrate dehydrogenase is stimulated by ADP and allosterically
199

inhibited by ATP. The reactions that produce NADH + H+ or FADH2
also influence the regulation of the Krebs cycle. If NAD+ and FAD2+
are not available in sufficient quantities to accept hydrogen, the rate
of the Krebs cycle is reduced. Also, when GTP accumulates, the
concentration of succinyl CoA increases, which inhibits the initial
reaction (oxaloacetate + acetyl-CoA → citrate + CoA) of the Krebs
cycle. The ETC is inhibited by ATP and stimulated by ADP (22). A
simplified overview of the metabolism of fat, carbohydrate, and
protein is presented in figure 3.8.
FIGURE 3.8 The metabolism of fat and that of carbohydrate and protein share some
common pathways. Note that many are oxidized to acetyl-CoA and enter the Krebs cycle.
Energy Production and Capacity
The phosphagen, glycolytic, and oxidative energy systems differ in
their ability to supply energy for activities of various intensities and
durations (tables 3.2 and 3.3). Exercise intensity is often defined in
200

terms of mechanical power (which is the rate of doing work) as an
overall measure of the external power flow required to achieve a
desired level of muscular activity output (100). Activities performed
at relatively high intensity for very short durations, such as
resistance training, require a rapid rate of energy supply and rely
almost entirely on energy provided by the phosphagen system.
Activities that are of low intensity but long duration, such as
marathon running, require a prolonged energy supply and rely
predominantly on the energy supplied by the oxidative energy
system. The primary source of energy for activities between these
two extremes depends on the intensity and duration of the event
(table 3.2). In general, short, high-intensity activities (e.g., high-
intensity resistance training and sprinting) rely largely on the
phosphagen energy system and glycolysis under anaerobic
conditions whereby pyruvate is primarily converted to lactate,
commonly referred to as fast glycolysis. As the intensity decreases
and duration increases, the emphasis gradually shifts to slow
glycolysis and the oxidative energy system (45, 131).
TABLE 3.2 Effect of Event Duration and Intensity on
Primary Energy System Used
Duration of event
Intensity of event
Primary energy system
0-6 s
Extremely high
Phosphagen
6-30 s
Very high
Phosphagen and fast glycolysis
30 s to 2 min
High
Fast glycolysis
2-3 min
Moderate
Slow glycolysis and oxidative system
>3 min
Low
Oxidative system
Note: The relationships between duration, intensity, and primary energy systems used
assume that the athlete strives to attain the best possible performance for a given event.
TABLE 3.3 Rankings of Rate and Capacity of ATP
Production
201

System
Rate of ATP production Capacity of ATP production
Phosphagen
1
5
Fast glycolysis
2
4
Slow glycolysis
3
3
Oxidation of carbohydrates
4
2
Oxidation of fats and proteins
5
1
Note: 1 = fastest/greatest; 5 = slowest/least.
In general, an inverse relationship exists between a
given energy system’s maximum rate of ATP production
(i.e., ATP produced per unit of time) and its capacity
(i.e., the total amount of ATP produced over time). The
phosphagen system is capable of achieving the highest
rate of ATP production, while fat oxidation through the
oxidative system has the greatest capacity of ATP
production. As a result, the phosphagen energy system
primarily supplies ATP for high-intensity activities of
short duration (e.g., 100 m sprint), the glycolytic system
for moderate- to high-intensity activities of short to
medium duration (e.g., 400 m dash), and the oxidative
system for low-intensity activities of long duration (e.g.,
marathon).
The duration of the activity also influences which energy system is
used. Athletic events range in duration from 1 to 3 seconds (e.g.,
snatch and shot put) to more than 4 hours (e.g., long-distance
triathlons and ultramarathons). If an athlete makes a best effort (an
effort that results in the best possible performance for a given
event), the time considerations shown in table 3.2 are reasonable
(48, 79, 126, 146, 149).
At no time, during either exercise or rest, does any single energy
system provide the complete supply of energy. During exercise, the
202

degree to which anaerobic and oxidative systems contribute to the
energy being produced is determined primarily by the exercise
intensity and secondarily by exercise duration (22, 45, 48).
The extent to which each of the three energy systems
contributes to ATP production depends primarily on the
intensity of muscular activity and secondarily on the
duration. At no time, during either exercise or rest, does
any single energy system provide the complete supply of
energy.
203

Substrate Depletion and Repletion
Energy substrates—molecules that provide starting materials for
bioenergetic reactions, including phosphagens (ATP and CP),
glucose, glycogen, lactate, free fatty acids, and amino acids—can be
selectively depleted during the performance of activities of various
intensities and durations. Subsequently, the energy that can be
produced by the bioenergetic systems is reduced. Fatigue
experienced during many activities is frequently associated with the
depletion of phosphagens (66, 89) and glycogen (21, 79, 92, 133).
Importantly, performance is rarely limited by the depletion of
substrates such as free fatty acids, lactate, and amino acids.
Consequently, the depletion and repletion pattern of phosphagens
and glycogen following physical activity is important in exercise and
sport bioenergetics.
Phosphagens
Fatigue during exercise appears to be at least partially related to the
decrease in phosphagens (i.e., ATP and CP). Phosphagen
concentrations in muscle are more rapidly depleted as a result of
high-intensity anaerobic exercise compared to aerobic exercise (66,
89). CP can decrease markedly (50%-70%) during the first stage of
high-intensity exercise of short and moderate duration (5-30 s) and
can be almost completely depleted as a result of very intense
exercise to exhaustion (86, 93, 97, 110). Muscle ATP concentrations
may decrease only slightly (34) or may decrease up to 50% to 60%
(145) of the pre-exercise levels during experimentally induced
fatigue. It should also be noted that dynamic muscle actions that
produce external work use more metabolic energy and typically
deplete phosphagens to a greater extent than do isometric muscle
actions (18).
The intramuscular ATP concentration is largely sustained during
exercise as a consequence of CP depletion and the contribution of
additional ATP from the myokinase reaction and oxidation of other
204

energy sources, such as glycogen and free fatty acids. Postexercise
phosphagen repletion can occur in a relatively short period, with
complete ATP resynthesis occurring within approximately 3 to 5
minutes, and CP being fully resynthesized within 8 minutes (75, 89).
Note that half of the CP stores are replenished in 30 seconds,
allowing for repeated maximal contractions interspersed with brief
rest 
intervals. 
While 
repletion 
of 
phosphagens 
is 
largely
accomplished as a result of aerobic metabolism (75), glycolysis can
contribute to recovery after high-intensity exercise (29, 40).
The effects of training and supplementation on resting
concentrations of phosphagens is an ongoing area of investigation.
Aerobic endurance training may increase resting concentrations of
phosphagens (49, 99) and decrease their rate of depletion at a given
absolute submaximal power output (33, 99) but not at a relative
(percentage of maximum) submaximal power output (33). Although
researchers 
have 
reported 
indications 
of 
increased 
resting
concentrations of phosphagens (12, 127), short-term (eight weeks)
studies of sprint and six months of resistance or explosive training
have not shown alterations in resting concentrations of phosphagens
(11, 16, 147, 150). However, total phosphagen content can be larger
following sprint training due to increases in muscle mass (150).
Resistance training has been shown to increase the resting
concentrations of phosphagens in the triceps brachii after five weeks
of training (106). The increases in phosphagen concentration are
likely due to selective hypertrophy of type II fibers, which are
reported to contain a higher phosphagen concentration than type I
fibers (105).
Glycogen
Limited stores of glycogen are available for exercise. Approximately
300 to 400 grams (11-14 oz) of glycogen are stored in the body’s
total muscle and about 70 to 100 grams (2-4 oz) in the liver (137).
Resting concentrations of liver and muscle glycogen can be
influenced by training and dietary manipulations (56, 137). Research
205

suggests that both anaerobic training, including sprinting and
resistance training (16, 106), and aerobic endurance training (64,
65) can increase resting muscle glycogen concentration with
concomitantly appropriate nutrition.
The rate of glycogen depletion is related to exercise intensity
(137). Muscle glycogen is a more important energy source than liver
glycogen during moderate- and high-intensity exercise. Liver
glycogen appears to be more important during low-intensity
exercise, and its contribution to metabolic processes increases with
duration of exercise. Increases in relative exercise intensity of 50%,
75%, and 100% of maximal oxygen uptake result in increases in the
rate of muscle glycogenolysis (the breakdown of glycogen) of 0.7,
1.4, and 3.4 mmol · kg−1 · min−1, respectively (133). At relative
intensities of exercise above 60% of maximal oxygen uptake, muscle
glycogen becomes an increasingly important energy substrate; the
entire glycogen content of some muscle cells can become depleted
during exercise (132).
Relatively constant blood glucose concentrations are maintained
at very low exercise intensities (<50% of maximal oxygen uptake)
because of low muscle glucose uptake. However, as exercise
duration increases beyond 90 minutes, blood glucose concentrations
fall but rarely below 2.8 mmol/L (2). Long-duration exercise (>90
min) at higher intensities (>50% of maximal oxygen uptake) may
result in substantially decreased blood glucose concentrations as a
result of liver glycogen depletion. Hypoglycemic reactions may occur
in some people with exercise-induced blood glucose values less than
2.5 mmol/L (3, 35). Reduced liver carbohydrate stores cause a
decline in blood glucose to approximately 2.5 to 3.0 mmol/L,
resulting in diminished carbohydrate oxidation and eventual
exhaustion (32, 35, 137). However, before exhaustion occurs, it is
important to note that other ATP sources are converted to glucose
through gluconeogenesis, with free fatty acids becoming the
predominant fuel source.
206

Very high-intensity, intermittent exercise, such as high-intensity
resistance training, can cause substantial depletion of muscle
glycogen (decreases of 20%-60%) with relatively few sets (low total
volume) (100, 126, 146, 148). Although phosphagens may be the
primary limiting factor during resistance exercise with high
resistance and few repetitions or few sets, muscle glycogen may
become the limiting factor for resistance training with larger volumes
of work accumulated using many sets and repetitions (126). This
type of exercise could cause selective muscle fiber glycogen
depletion (more depletion in type II fibers), which can also limit
performance (50, 126). As with other types of dynamic exercise, the
rate of muscle glycogenolysis during resistance exercise depends on
intensity (i.e., the greater the intensity, the faster the rate of
glycogenolysis). However, it appears that when the total work
performed is equal, the absolute amount of glycogen depletion is
similar, regardless of the resistance training session’s intensity (69,
126).
Repletion of muscle glycogen during recovery is related to
postexercise carbohydrate ingestion. Repletion appears to be optimal
if 0.7 to 3.0 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram of body weight is
ingested every 2 hours following exercise (56, 137). This level of
carbohydrate consumption can maximize muscle glycogen repletion
at 5 to 6 mmol/g of wet muscle mass per hour during the first 4 to 6
hours following exercise. Muscle glycogen may be completely
replenished within 24 hours, provided that sufficient carbohydrate is
ingested (56, 137). However, if the exercise has a high eccentric
component (associated with exercise-induced muscle damage), more
time may be required to completely replenish muscle glycogen (121,
164).
Similar Response in Younger and Older
Resistance-Trained Male Muscle Oxidative
207

Capacity Following Endurance Training
Hendrickse and colleagues (77) tested the hypothesis that superimposing
endurance training in both older and younger highly resistance-trained men would
lead to an increase in fiber oxidative capacity and a decrease in fiber size. Eight
highly resistance-trained younger (mean age = 28 years) and seven older (mean
age = 67 years) men participated in a 10-week cycle endurance-training program
consisting of five 6-minute intervals at 75% max heart rate (HRmax) separated by
4-minute intervals at 90% HRmax, superimposed on their usual resistance training
program of at least 4 sessions per week (2 upper body, 2 lower body). Before and
after the 10 weeks of training, V̇O2max, body fat percentage, an MRI of the upper
leg, the maximal voluntary isometric contraction torque (MVC) of the knee
extensor muscles, and a vastus lateralis muscle biopsy were taken. While there
were expected differences in anatomical cross-sectional area of the thigh muscles,
following training no relative difference was observed between younger and older
men for V̇O2max per kilogram body mass. The imposed endurance training equally
increased the succinate dehydrogenase (a Krebs cycle enzyme) activity in both
younger and older participants and significantly increased the number of capillaries
around type I fibers. These findings suggest that incorporating endurance training
into a resistance training program can promote aerobic metabolic adaptations
without compromising muscle size and strength in both younger and older
resistance-trained people. Extending this research in the future will help to
determine whether there is a threshold for the volume and type of endurance
exercise beyond which leads to compromised muscle size and strength
adaptations.
208

Bioenergetic Limiting Factors in
Exercise Performance
Factors limiting maximal performance (22, 49, 79, 88, 104, 156)
must be considered in the mechanisms of fatigue experienced during
exercise and training. Understanding the possible limiting factors
associated with a particular athletic event is required when one is
designing training programs to achieve a physiological adaptation
that seeks to delay fatigue and possibly enhance performance. Table
3.4 depicts examples of various limiting factors based on depletion
of energy sources and increases in muscle hydrogen ions, although
other potential factors have been postulated.
Glycogen depletion can be a limiting factor both for long-duration,
low-intensity exercise supported primarily by aerobic metabolism and
for repeated, high-intensity exercise supported primarily by
anaerobic mechanisms. Of importance to resistance training,
sprinting, and other primarily anaerobic activities is the effect of
metabolic acidosis on limiting contractile force (53, 79, 116, 117,
125). Several other factors have been implicated in the development
of muscle fatigue and may limit exercise performance, including
increased intracellular Pi, ammonia accumulation, increased ADP, and
impaired calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (4, 5, 131,
156, 160). Further research is needed to delineate the causes of
muscular fatigue and the limiting factors in exercise performance.
TABLE 3.4 Ranking of Bioenergetic Limiting Factors
Exercise
ATP
and CP
Muscle
glycogen
Liver
glycogen
Fat
stores
Lower
pH
Marathon
1
5
4-5
2-3
1
Triathlon
1-2
5
4-5
1-2
1-2
5,000 m run
1-2
3
3
1-2
1
Note: 1 = least probable limiting factor; 5 = most probable limiting factor.
209

Exercise
ATP
and CP
Muscle
glycogen
Liver
glycogen
Fat
stores
Lower
pH
1,500 m run
2-3
3-4
2
1-2
2-3
400 m swim
2-3
3-4
3
1
1-2
400 m run
3
3
1
1
4-5
100 m run
5
1-2
1
1
1-2
Discus
2-3
1
1
1
1
Repeated snatch exercise at
60% 1RM (10 sets)
4-5
4-5
1-2
1-2
4-5
Note: 1 = least probable limiting factor; 5 = most probable limiting factor.
210

Oxygen Uptake and the Aerobic and
Anaerobic Contributions to Exercise
Oxygen uptake (or consumption) is a measure of a person’s ability to
take in oxygen via the respiratory system and deliver it to the
working tissues via the cardiovascular system, and the ability of
working tissues (predominantly skeletal muscle) to use oxygen.
During low-intensity exercise with a constant power output, oxygen
uptake increases for the first few minutes until a steady state of
uptake (oxygen demand equals oxygen consumption) is reached
(figure 3.9) (7, 85).
FIGURE 3.9 Low-intensity, steady-state exercise metabolism: 75% of maximal oxygen
uptake (V̇O2max). EPOC = excess postexercise oxygen consumption; V̇O2 = oxygen uptake.
At the start of an exercise bout, however, some of the energy
must be supplied through anaerobic mechanisms because the
aerobic system responds slowly to the initial increase in the demand
for energy (62, 155). This anaerobic contribution to the total energy
cost of exercise is termed the oxygen deficit (figure 3.9) (85, 109).
After exercise ceases, oxygen uptake remains above pre-exercise
211

levels for a period of time that varies according to the intensity and
length of the exercise. Postexercise oxygen uptake has been termed
the oxygen debt (85, 109), recovery O2 (109), or the excess
postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) (22). The EPOC is
the oxygen uptake above resting values used to restore homeostasis
to the pre-exercise condition (141). Only small to moderate
relationships between the oxygen deficit and the EPOC have been
observed (13, 77); the oxygen deficit may influence the size of the
EPOC, but the two are not equal. The possible factors affecting the
EPOC are listed in the sidebar Excess Postexercise Oxygen
Consumption Is Intensity, Duration, and Mode Dependent (17, 21,
22, 58, 109).
Excess Postexercise Oxygen Consumption
Is Intensity, Duration, and Mode
Dependent
Excess postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) refers to the prolonged increase
in V̇O2 that may be observed for hours after exercise (58).
Aerobic Exercise and EPOC (17)
Intensity has the greatest effect on EPOC.
The greatest EPOC values are found when both exercise intensity (i.e.,
>50%-60% V̇O2max) and durations (i.e., >40 min) are high.
Performing brief, intermittent bouts of supramaximal exercise (i.e., >100%
V̇O2max) may induce the greatest EPOC with lower total work.
There is interindividual variability for EPOC in response to a given relative
exercise stimulus.
The effects of aerobic exercise modes on EPOC are unclear.
Resistance Exercise and EPOC (17)
Heavy resistance exercise (i.e., three sets, eight exercises to exhaustion,
80%-90% 1RM) produces greater EPOC than circuit weight training (i.e., 4
sets, 8 exercises, 15 repetitions, 50% 1RM).
Thus, EPOC is also intensity dependent in response to resistance training.
212

Factors Responsible for EPOC (17)
Replenishment of oxygen in blood and muscle
ATP and CP resynthesis
Increased body temperature, circulation, and ventilation
Increased rate of triglyceride–fatty acid cycling
Increased protein turnover
Changes in energy efficiency during recovery
Anaerobic mechanisms provide much of the energy for work if the
exercise intensity is above the maximal oxygen uptake that a person
can attain (figure 3.10). Generally, as the contribution of anaerobic
mechanisms supporting the exercise increases, the exercise duration
decreases (7, 68, 158, 159).
FIGURE 3.10 High-intensity, non–steady-state exercise metabolism (80% of maximum
power output). The required V̇O2 here is the oxygen uptake that would be required to
sustain the exercise if such an uptake were possible to attain. Because it is not, the oxygen
deficit lasts for the duration of the exercise. EPOC = excess postexercise oxygen
consumption; V̇O2max = maximal oxygen uptake.
The 
approximate 
contribution 
of 
anaerobic 
and 
aerobic
mechanisms to maximal sustained efforts on a cycle ergometer is
213

shown in table 3.5 (112, 151, 161). Anaerobic mechanisms are
primary contributors for exercise durations up to 60 seconds, after
which aerobic metabolism becomes progressively the primary
energy-supplying 
mechanism. 
The 
contribution 
of 
anaerobic
mechanisms to this type of exercise represents the maximal
anaerobic capacity (111, 151).
TABLE 3.5 Contributions of Anaerobic and Aerobic
Mechanisms to Maximal Sustained Efforts in Bicycle
Ergometry
0-5
s
30
s
60
s
90
s
150 s
200 s
Exercise intensity (% of maximum
power output)
100
55
35
31
Not
available
Not
available
Contribution of anaerobic mechanisms
(%)
96
75
50
35
30
22
Contribution of aerobic mechanisms
(%)
4
25
50
65
70
78
214

Metabolic Specificity of Training
Appropriate exercise intensities and rest intervals can permit the
“selection” of specific primary energy systems during training for
specific athletic events (22, 109, 157). Few sports or physical
activities require maximal sustained effort to exhaustion or near-
exhaustion, such as competitive middle-distance sprints (400 m to
1,600 m). Most team sports and training activities produce metabolic
profiles that are very similar to those of a series of high-intensity,
constant- or near-constant-effort exercise bouts interspersed with
rest periods, such as American football, basketball, and hockey. In
this type of exercise, the required exercise intensity (work
performed) that must be met during each exercise bout is much
greater than that which can be sustained using aerobic energy
sources alone. Increasing aerobic energy efficiency and capacity
through primarily long, slow aerobic endurance training while
simultaneously compromising or neglecting anaerobic energy
efficiency and anaerobic capacity training is of little benefit to
athletes in these sports (84, 111). For example, it would be of little
benefit for a baseball player to run many long, slow miles during
training rather than focusing on exercises that can concurrently
improve anaerobic power and capacity using time efficient interval
training.
The use of appropriate exercise intensities and rest
intervals (i.e., work-to-rest ratios) allows for the
“selection” of specific primary energy systems during
training and, because this is more reflective of the
actual metabolic demands of the sport, results in more
efficient and productive regimens for specific athletic
events with various metabolic demands.
215

Interval Training
Interval training is a method that emphasizes bioenergetic
adaptations for a more efficient energy transfer within the metabolic
pathways by using predetermined intervals of exercise and rest
periods (i.e., work-to-rest ratios). Theoretically, properly spaced
work-to-rest intervals allow more work to be completed at higher
exercise intensities with the same or less fatigue than during
continuous training at the same relative intensity. An early paper by
Christensen and colleagues (31) compared the total running
distance, average oxygen uptake, and blood lactate concentration
during continuous running for 5 minutes and interval running
totaling 30 minutes with 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-rest ratios.
Subjects were assigned a continuous running intensity (speed) that
would result in fatigue within 5 minutes. At that fast pace during the
continuous run, the subjects were able to complete 0.81 miles (1.3
km) before exhaustion. However, by using 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-
rest ratios and the same running intensity for a total duration of 30
minutes, the subjects were able to complete 4.14 miles (6.66 km),
3.11 miles (5 km), and 2.07 miles (3.33 km), respectively, all while
working aerobic capacity in a manner similar to that in the
continuous running condition. Therefore, much more distance can be
accomplished at higher intensities with interval training; this concept
has been established for over 45 years (31).
A series of short-term (two-week) interval training studies used
six sessions of four to seven 30-second maximum cycling efforts
interspaced with 4 minutes of recovery (1:8 work-to-rest ratio).
These studies demonstrated improvements in muscle oxidative
potential (26, 63), muscle buffering capacity (26, 63), muscle
glycogen content (25, 26), and time-trial performance (25), as well
as a doubled aerobic endurance capacity (26). In addition, a similar
four-week interval training program exhibited increases in muscle
activation and total work output (38) in trained cyclists. This
highlights the concept that the modality of exercise does not seem
216

to influence the efficacy of using interval training for metabolic
adaptations.
Few studies provide results that can be used to generate
definitive guidelines for choosing specific work-to-rest ratios. One
such study, however, reported aerobic and anaerobic metabolic
variables, total work, and time-to-exhaustion differences between
two different work-to-rest ratios in elite cyclists (119). The cyclists
performed two intermittent protocols that included either a 40:20-
second or a 30:30-second work-to-rest interval to exhaustion at a
fixed work rate. The 40:20-second work-to-rest ratio resulted in
significantly reduced total work and time to exhaustion while
producing higher metabolic values (V̇O2max, lactate concentration,
ETC). In contrast, the 30:30-second work-to-rest ratio provided
sustained but slightly lower metabolic values for a considerably
longer period of time. Another study manipulated the work variable
via intensity and duration of the work-to-rest ratios. Wakefield and
Glaister (154) reported a greater amount of time above 95%
V̇O2max during running at an intensity of 105% of V̇O2max versus
115% of V̇O2max with a work duration of 30 seconds rather than 20
and 25 seconds (rest = 20 s). When one is determining the proper
work-to-rest ratio for athletes, knowledge of the time intervals,
intensity of work, and recovery periods for each of the energy
systems is critical to maximizing the amount of work that can be
accomplished for a given exercise intensity. For example, after a
bout of maximal exercise that depletes CP stores, the complete
resynthesis of CP is generally 3 to 5 minutes but may take up to 8
minutes (75) even though the half time for CP resynthesis is only
approximately 30 seconds, suggesting that short-duration, high-
intensity exercise requires greater work-to-rest ratios due to the
aerobic mechanisms that replete phosphagen stores (75).
In contrast, as the goals of training change to longer-duration,
lower-intensity tasks, the durations of the work intervals can be
longer; this will lengthen the rest periods and decrease the work-to-
rest ratios. Table 3.6 provides some general guidelines for work-to-
217

rest ratios that are designed to emphasize the development of
specific energy systems based on the theoretical time course for
metabolic system involvement and substrate recovery. However, it
should be noted that more research is necessary to provide
evidence-based recommendations for optimal work-to-rest ratios.
TABLE 3.6 Using Interval Training to Train Specific
Energy Systems
% of maximum
power
Primary system
stressed
Typical
exercise time
Range of work-to-rest
period ratios
90-100
Phosphagen
5-10 s
1:12 to 1:20
75-90
Fast glycolysis
15-30 s
1:3 to 1:5
30-75
Fast glycolysis and
oxidative
1-3 min
1:3 to 1:4
20-30
Oxidative
>3 min
1:1 to 1:3
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) involves brief repeated
bouts of high-intensity exercise with intermittent recovery periods.
High-intensity interval training typically incorporates either running-
or cycling-based modes of exercise and is an efficient exercise
regimen for eliciting cardiopulmonary (23) and metabolic and
neuromuscular (24) adaptations. In fact, Buchheit and Laursen (23)
stated that HIIT “is today considered one of the most effective forms
of exercise for improving physical performance in athletes” (p. 314).
High-intensity interval training is often discussed in terms of duty
cycles involving a high-intensity work phase followed by a lower-
intensity recovery phase. However, the duty cycle is analogous to a
work bout or period as commonly used in other training regimes. It
has been suggested that nine different HIIT variables can be
manipulated to achieve the most precise metabolic specificity (23),
including
intensity of the active portion of each work bout,
218

duration of the active portion of each work bout,
intensity of the recovery portion of each work bout,
duration of the recovery portion of each work bout,
number of work bouts performed in each set,
number of sets,
rest time between sets,
recovery intensity between sets, and
mode of exercise for HIIT.
The authors (24) indicate, however, that the intensities and
durations of the active and recovery portions of each work bout are
the most important factors to consider. To optimize HIIT training
adaptations for athletes, HIIT sessions should maximize the time
spent at or near V̇O2max. In comparison to more general interval
training, during HIIT specifically, the cumulative duration and
intensity of the active portions of the work bouts should equate to
several minutes above 90% of V̇O2max (24).
The benefits of a HIIT protocol designed to repeatedly elicit a
very high percentage of V̇O2max are primarily the result of the
concurrent recruitment of large motor units and near-maximal
cardiac output (6). Thus, HIIT provides a stimulus for both oxidative
muscle fiber adaptation and myocardial hypertrophy. Additional HIIT
adaptations include increases in V̇O2max, proton buffering, glycogen
content, anaerobic thresholds, time to exhaustion, and time-trial
performance. For example, Gibala and coworkers (63) reported
equivalent improvements in muscle buffering capacity and glycogen
content for HIIT at 250% of V̇O2peak during four to six 30-second
cycling sprints compared to continuous cycling for 90 to 120 minutes
at 65% of V̇O2peak over six total training sessions. In addition, 750
kilojoules cycling time trials decreased in both groups by 10.1% and
7.5% in the HIIT and long, slow endurance training groups,
respectively. Thus, HIIT provided performance and physiological
adaptations equivalent to those of long, slow endurance training but
in a time-efficient manner.
219

Combining Training Modalities
Some suggest that aerobic endurance training should be added to
the training of anaerobic athletes to enhance recovery, because it is
postulated that recovery relies primarily on aerobic mechanisms. In
contrast, it is postulated that anaerobic resistance training should be
added to aerobic endurance training because it can aid in preventing
soft tissue injuries. However, when considering the metabolic
specificity of training, thought should be given to whether the
practitioner is programming combination training, cross-training, or
concurrent training. These are related but distinctly different
concepts when seeking to achieve metabolic specific training
adaptations. Broadly, combination training refers to any training
program that includes a mix of different types of exercises or
activities. It does not necessarily imply a specific structure or timing,
just that various exercise modalities are combined to achieve overall
fitness improvements. For example, an 800-meter runner may
include sessions of long, slow distance aerobic work alongside more
event-specific distances and efforts. In contrast, cross-training
deliberately involves incorporating different types of exercise with
the same underlying metabolic adaptation profile (i.e., enhancing
aerobic capacity), without overstressing the primary activity muscles
(e.g., including rowing in a program for a runner), often with the aim
of complementing the main sport performance. In comparison,
concurrent training refers to the simultaneous training of both
anaerobic resistance training and aerobic endurance training at
multiple times within the same period, often within the same training
session or day. In fact, several studies have demonstrated that
recovery in anaerobic power output is related to endurance fitness
(14, 15, 74). Bogdanis and colleagues (14) reported positive
relationships in power recovery in the first 10 seconds of a cycling
sprint, the resynthesis of PCr, and endurance fitness (V̇O2max).
However, aerobic endurance training may reduce anaerobic
performance capabilities, particularly for high-strength, high-power
performance (82). This reduction in high-strength, high-power
220

performance capabilities could be due to an interference in
anaerobic energy production capabilities due to aerobic endurance
training (153). Additionally, combined anaerobic and aerobic
endurance training can reduce gains in muscle girth (36, 128),
maximum strength (36, 76, 128), and speed- and power-related
performance (44, 73).
Even though the exact mechanism for this interference
phenomenon is unknown and whether there is any threshold limit, it
has been suggested that combination training and, more specifically,
concurrent training may increase training volume to a level that may
result in overtraining in comparison to aerobic and anaerobic training
alone. Hickson and colleagues (82) provide evidence that concurrent
training that includes progressive endurance running and cycling and
heavy resistance training may produce a plateau effect and,
ultimately, a decrease in strength gains. Specifically, it was reported
that the concurrent training program of heavy resistance training
combined 
with 
an 
endurance 
program 
provided 
significant
improvements in squat strength during the first seven weeks of the
program, followed by a two-week plateau and then a decrease in
squat strength during the final two weeks of the program. The
results provided evidence that continual strength gains may be
inhibited with progressive concurrent endurance training such as
running and cycling. Other mechanisms that have been suggested to
hinder the development of strength when combined with endurance
training are (a) decreasing rapid voluntary activation, (b) chronically
lower muscle glycogen levels that limit intracellular signaling
responses during resistance training, and (c) fiber type transition to
slow-twitch fibers (114).
Alternatively, some studies and reviews indicate that the opposite
holds true; these suggest that anaerobic training (resistance
training) can improve low- and high-intensity exercise endurance
(54, 83, 84, 136). Sedano and colleagues (134) reported
improvements in performance of highly trained runners as a result of
concurrent endurance, resistance, and plyometric training. There
221

was no reduction in V̇O2max over the 12 weeks in runners who
participated in resistance and plyometric training. Furthermore, the
concurrent training improved performance measures such as
maximal strength, peak running velocity, and 3-kilometer (1.7 miles)
time trial compared to endurance training alone. Thus, in highly
trained runners it appears that strength training can improve
performance while not hindering metabolic parameters (V̇O2max).
Although oxidative metabolism is important for increased
postexercise V̇O2, lactate removal, and PCr restoration from heavy
anaerobic exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprint training)
(135), care must be used in prescribing aerobic endurance training
for anaerobic sports. In this context, it should be noted that specific
anaerobic training can stimulate increases in aerobic power and
enhance markers of recovery (54). Thus, it appears that extensive
aerobic endurance training to enhance recovery from anaerobic
events is not necessary and may be counterproductive in most
strength and power sports.
222

Conclusion
Training programs with increased productivity can be designed
through an understanding of how energy is produced during various
types of exercise and how energy production can be modified by
specific training regimens. Which energy system is used to supply
energy for muscular contraction and to perform work is determined
primarily by the intensity of exercise and secondarily by the duration
of exercise. Metabolic responses and training adaptations are largely
regulated by exercise characteristics (e.g., intensity, duration, and
recovery intervals). How these responses and adaptations occur
following physical activity forms the basis for metabolic specificity of
exercise and training. This principle allows for enhanced athletic
performance through the implementation of improved training
programs.
KEY TERMS
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase)
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
adenylate kinase reaction
aerobic
aerobic glycolysis
allosteric activation
allosteric inhibition
anabolism
anaerobic
anaerobic glycolysis
beta oxidation
bioenergetics
branched-chain amino acid
calcium ATPase
223

catabolism
combination training
concurrent training
Cori cycle
creatine kinase
creatine phosphate (CP)
cross-training
cytochrome
depletion
duty cycles
electron transport chain (ETC)
endergonic reaction
energy
energy substrate
excess postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC)
exergonic reaction
fast glycolysis
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2)
gluconeogenesis
glycogenolysis
glycolysis
glycolytic system
high-intensity interval training (HIIT)
hydrolysis
inorganic phosphate
interval training
Krebs cycle
lactate
lactate threshold (LT)
lactic acid
law of mass action
LT1
LT2
mass action effect
224

metabolic acidosis
metabolic specificity
metabolism
mitochondria
myokinase reaction
myosin ATPase
near-equilibrium reactions
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)
oxidative phosphorylation
oxidative system
oxygen debt
oxygen deficit
oxygen uptake
phosphagen system
phosphocreatine (PCr)
phosphofructokinase (PFK)
phosphorylation
pyruvate
rate-limiting step
repletion
slow glycolysis
sodium-potassium ATPase
substrate-level phosphorylation
wet muscle
work-to-rest ratio
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following best describes the role of lactate during
the development of peripheral muscle fatigue?
  a.  Lactate accumulation and lactic acidosis are the primary
cause of peripheral fatigue.
  b.  High tissue lactate concentrations often correlate with
muscular fatigue, so they are thought to be the primary
225

cause of the changes in pH with high-intensity fatiguing
exercise.
  c.  Lactate is a by-product of when pyruvate is catalyzed, and
although metabolic acidosis has a prominent role in
peripheral fatigue, other factors such as an increased
interstitial K+ concentration and Pi that impairs Ca++
release have been reported to play a role in the
development of peripheral fatigue.
  d.  The excess H+ that causes peripheral fatigue primarily
results from the rapid hydrolysis of ATP during the
conversion of pyruvate to lactate.
  2.  What is the correct net reaction summary for glycolysis when
pyruvate is converted to lactate?
  a.  Glucose + 2Pi + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2ATP + 2H2O + H+
  b.  Glucose + 2Pi + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2ATP + 2H2O
  c.  Glucose + ADP + creatine phosphate → ATP + creatine
  d.  Glucose + 2ADP → Lactate + 2ATP
  3.  Metabolism is the total of which four reactions?
  a.  aerobic, anaerobic, oxidative, and glycolytic
  b.  catabolic, anabolic, exergonic, and endergonic
  c.  anabolic, catabolic, glycolytic, and oxidative
  d.  hydrolysis, catabolic, anabolic, and endergonic
  4.  Which enzyme is the most important regulator of glycolysis
and why?
  a.  phosphofructokinase, because it is the rate-limiting step
  b.  hexokinase, because it is the rate-limiting step
  c.  phosphofructokinase, because it is allosteric activating
  d.  pyruvate kinase, because it is the rate-limiting step
5. During exercise what are the primary and secondary
determinants for which energy system is the primary
contributing system?
a. primary: intensity; secondary: type
b. primary: intensity; secondary: duration
226
