CHAPTER 6
ADAPTATIONS TO AEROBIC
TRAINING
Kate Baldwin, PhD, and Glen B. Deakin, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Ann Swank and
Carwyn P.M. Sharp to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identify and describe the impact of chronic aerobic endurance
training on the physiological characteristics of the
cardiovascular, respiratory, nervous, muscular, bone and
connective tissue, and endocrine systems;
recognize the interaction between aerobic endurance training
and optimizing physiological responses of all body systems;
identify and describe external factors that influence adaptations
to chronic aerobic exercise including altitude, heat, smoking
and vaping, blood doping, and detraining; and
recognize the physiological differences between altitude
training and heat acclimation.
Understanding how body systems adapt to long-term aerobic
exercise is essential for strength and conditioning professionals to
design effective training programs. This chapter explores the
physiological changes that occur in response to sustained aerobic
339

endurance training. It also examines how external factors—including
altitude, heat, detraining, and blood doping—affect the body’s
responses and adaptations to this type of exercise. By covering both
the fundamental adaptations and the impact of these external
influences, the chapter provides a comprehensive overview of
aerobic endurance training effects.
340

Chronic Adaptations to Aerobic Exercise
Understanding the effects of aerobic endurance training on the body
systems is important for assessing physical or athletic performance
and determining the impact of training programs. This section deals
with the effects of aerobic endurance training on the cardiovascular,
respiratory, nervous, muscular, bone and connective tissue, and
endocrine systems of the body (table 6.1).
Cardiovascular Adaptations
Aerobic 
endurance 
training 
results 
in 
several 
changes 
in
cardiovascular function, including increased maximal cardiac output,
increased stroke volume, and reduced heart rate at rest and during
submaximal exercise. In addition, muscle fiber capillary density
increases as a result of aerobic endurance training, supporting
delivery of oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide.
TABLE 6.1 Physiological Adaptations to Aerobic
Endurance Training
Variable
Aerobic endurance training adaptations
PERFORMANCE
Muscular strength
No change
Muscular endurance
Increases for low power output
Aerobic power
Increases
Exercise economy
Increases
Maximal rate of force production
No change or decreases
Anaerobic power
No change
Sprint speed
No change
CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION
Heart rate
Note: ATP = adenosine triphosphate; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
341

Variable
Aerobic endurance training adaptations
Resting and submaximal exercise
Decreases
Maximal exercise
No change or decreases
Stroke volume
Increases
Cardiac output
Resting or submaximal exercise
No change or decreases
Maximal exercise
Increases
MUSCLE FIBERS
Fiber size
No change or increases slightly
Capillary density
Increases
Mitochondrial density
Increases
Cytoplasmic density
No change
Myosin heavy chain protein
No change or decreases in amount
Myofibrillar
Packing density
No change
Volume
No change
ENZYME ACTIVITY
Creatine phosphokinase
Increases
Myokinase
Increases
Phosphofructokinase
Variable
Lactate dehydrogenase
Variable
Sodium–potassium ATPase
May slightly increase
METABOLIC ENERGY STORES
Stored ATP
Increases
Stored creatine phosphate
Increases
Stored glycogen
Increases
Note: ATP = adenosine triphosphate; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
342

Variable
Aerobic endurance training adaptations
Stored triglycerides
Increase
Fat oxidation
Increases
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Ligament strength
Increases
Tendon strength
Increases
Collagen content
Variable
Bone density
No change or increases
BODY COMPOSITION
% body fat
Decreases
Fat-free mass
No change
Note: ATP = adenosine triphosphate; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
The most significant change in cardiovascular function with long-
term (6-12 months) aerobic endurance training is the increase in
maximal cardiac output, resulting primarily from improved stroke
volume; maximal heart rate generally remains unaltered or may
even decrease slightly. Because maximal heart rate may remain
unaltered or actually decrease slightly with prolonged training (95),
perhaps as a result of increased parasympathetic tone (13), the size
of the left ventricle (both chamber volume and wall thickness) and
the strength of contractions (increased contractility) are the key to
increasing stroke volume with maximal as well as submaximal
exercise. Consequently, a significantly lower heart rate in response
to a standardized submaximal level of work is another hallmark of
aerobic endurance training. Furthermore, heart rate increases more
slowly in trained athletes than in sedentary people for a given
workload (38, 108).
Another notable change that comes with aerobic endurance
training is the peripheral cardiovascular adaptations at the level of
the arterioles and capillaries within the muscles (108). Increased
343

muscle fiber capillary density has been observed in response to
aerobic endurance training and is a function of the volume and
intensity of training. In addition to delivering oxygen, nutrients, and
hormones, the capillary circulation provides the means for removing
heat and metabolic by-products. Subsequently, increasing capillary
density decreases the diffusion distance for oxygen and metabolic
substrates, enabling an improved exchange during subsequent
aerobic endurance training and performances (88).
The implication of the abovementioned changes is that they
increase an aerobic endurance athlete’s ability to improve his or her
maximal oxygen uptake, which is of paramount importance for
optimal aerobic endurance performance. The reason for this is that a
close relationship exists between maximal cardiac output and
maximal oxygen uptake, the latter being the product of maximum
cardiac output and arteriovenous oxygen difference (108). More
simply, an increase in maximal oxygen uptake means more oxygen is
delivered to and extracted by the working muscles, thereby
providing an increase in exercise intensity and ultimately
performance.
While not related to aerobic endurance performance outcomes, it
is also worth noting that a common cardiovascular adaptation
following aerobic endurance training is a lower resting heart rate.
The normal discharge rate of the sinoatrial (SA) node ranges from
60 to 80 times per minute. Aerobic endurance training results in a
significantly slower discharge rate due to an increase in
parasympathetic tone. Increased stroke volume also affects the
resting heart rate, because more blood is pumped per contraction,
so the heart needs to contract less frequently to meet the same
cardiac output. Aerobic endurance training can increase the heart’s
ability to pump blood per contraction at rest and thus may account
for some of the significant bradycardia (slower heart rate)
observed in highly conditioned aerobic endurance athletes, whose
resting heart rates commonly range from 40 to 60 beats/min (58,
108). In addition to having low resting heart rates, aerobic
344

endurance–trained athletes have also been found to have an
accelerated heart rate recovery after exercise (13). This is important
to know for athlete training and monitoring purposes.
Respiratory Adaptations
Pulmonary ventilation generally does not limit aerobic exercise and is
either unaffected or only moderately affected by training (8, 32).
While the respiratory system can accommodate the demands of
high-intensity aerobic endurance exercise for the majority of
athletes, evidence suggests that in some highly trained aerobic
endurance athletes, such total body aerobic endurance exercise may
exceed the respiratory system’s functional capacity and affect the
ability to transport oxygen to locomotor musculature (2).
Furthermore, the ventilatory adaptations observed appear to be
highly specific to activities that involve the type of exercise used in
training; that is, adaptations observed during lower extremity
exercise primarily occur as a result of lower extremity training (108).
If exercise training focuses on the lower extremities, thereby
reducing lactate levels and carbon dioxide production from lactate
buffering as training adaptations take place, one will not likely
observe ventilatory adaptation during upper extremity activities,
where no training adaptations have taken place (108). Training
adaptations include increased tidal volume and breathing frequency
with maximal exercise. With submaximal activity, breathing
frequency is often reduced and tidal volume is increased. Ventilatory
adaptations result from local, neural, or chemical adaptations in the
specific muscles trained through exercise (8, 32).
Neural Adaptations
While neural adaptations resulting from strength and power training
and different speeds of locomotion have been thoroughly
investigated (134), as well as those from fatiguing static and
dynamic contraction perspectives (152), those arising from chronic
aerobic training remain relatively understudied. Nonetheless, chronic
345

aerobic training in disciplines such as cycling and running can lead to
beneficial adaptations in movement economy through improvements
in motor recruitment. Chronic aerobic training can result in increased
muscle coactivation, enhanced leg stiffness, and a greater ratio of
eccentric-to-concentric muscle activity, enabling athletes to use
stored elastic energy more efficiently, reducing the metabolic cost of
exercise (73a). Supporting research has shown that trained cyclists
and runners exhibit less variability in muscle activity between pedal
strokes and strides, respectively, as well as shorter durations of
muscle activity compared to their novice counterparts (21a).
Furthermore, multisport athletes, such as triathletes, demonstrate
more extensive and variable muscle coactivation, along with less
modulation and refined patterns of muscle activity during cycling and
running when compared to single-sport athletes (21a, 21b) reflecting
interference with neuromuscular adaptations from multisport
training.
Muscular Adaptations
One of the fundamental adaptive responses to aerobic endurance
training is an increase in the aerobic capacity of the trained
musculature. This adaptation allows the athlete to perform a given
absolute intensity of exercise with greater ease. More impressively,
after training, an athlete can exercise at a greater relative intensity
of a now-higher maximal aerobic power. Thus, measuring an
athlete’s maximal oxygen uptake only before and after aerobic
endurance training may not accurately portray his or her ability to
perform during competition. For example, an athlete who can run
the marathon at a pace equal to 75% of maximal oxygen uptake
may, after training, be able to maintain a pace that is 80% of
maximal aerobic power. This adaptation occurs as a result of an
improvement in what is called the athlete’s critical power or, more
simply, the athlete’s maximal oxidative energy capacity, which also
means that the exercising muscle’s rate of lactate production
matches the rate of clearance by muscles and other tissues (127a).
346

Consequently, the onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)
(see chapter 3) occurs at a higher percentage (up to 80%-90%) of
the trained athlete’s aerobic capacity.
The muscular component of an aerobic endurance training
program involves submaximal muscle contractions extended over a
large number of repetitions with little recovery. Therefore, the
relative intensity is very low, and the overall volume is very high.
This manner of training encourages relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167).
Compared to type II fibers, type I fibers have a higher preexisting
initial aerobic capacity, to which the increase in aerobic potential
from training is added (53). Thus, type I fibers possess an oxidative
capacity greater than that of type II fibers both before and after
training. However, it should be noted while aerobic endurance
training has been found to encourage relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167), such
training has also been found to reduce type I and type II fiber size
while maintaining or improving the functional ability of the fibers
(157). After 13 weeks of marathon running training, a reduction of
20% in muscle fiber size in both fiber types was found, while
strength in both fiber types was maintained and actually increased
by 18% in type IIa fibers following a three-week taper (157).
Little evidence shows that type II fibers change into type I fibers
as a result of aerobic endurance training, but there may be a gradual
conversion within the two major type II fiber subgroups of type IIx
fibers to type IIa fibers (4, 167). This adaptation is significant, in
that type IIa fibers possess a greater oxidative capacity than type IIx
fibers and have functional characteristics more similar to those of
type I fibers. However, it should also be noted that hybrid fibers,
which can have a combination of two or three isoforms (pure fibers),
are also present in skeletal muscles and can experience similar
adaptations (80). Hybrid fibers can increase or decrease depending
on the muscle’s composition before exercise as well as the exercise
stimulus encountered (110). In the case of an athlete undertaking
347

aerobic endurance exercise, for example, a hybrid I/IIa fiber could
transform to a type I fiber (110). This scenario was highlighted by
Trappe and colleagues (157), who examined the impact of aerobic
endurance training on muscle fiber adaptations in runners
participating in a 16-week marathon training study including a 3-
week taper and marathon. The results showed approximately a 50%
decline in the percentage of hybrid fibers and an increase in the
percentage of type I fibers in the gastrocnemius muscle. While our
understanding of how hybrid fibers in humans adapt to various
training environments is still evolving, we do know that hybrid fibers
in aerobic endurance runners are influenced by training volume, and
the content of hybrid fibers (i.e., distribution of MHC isoforms)
differs between longer- versus shorter-distance runners (80).
Further, 
the 
abovementioned 
conversions 
following 
aerobic
endurance training, whether within fiber type or from hybrid fibers,
results in a more oxidative phenotype of the muscle that contributes
to improved aerobic endurance performance.
At the cellular level, muscular adaptations to aerobic exercise
include an increase in the size and number of mitochondria (68) and
increased myoglobin content (26, 64). Myoglobin is a protein that
transports oxygen within the cell. Mitochondria are the organelles
in cells that are responsible for aerobically producing adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) via oxidation of pyruvate and lactate (the
products of glycolysis) and free fatty acids. When the larger and
more numerous mitochondria are combined with an increase in the
quantity of oxygen that can be delivered to mitochondria by the
greater concentration of myoglobin, the capacity of the muscle tissue
to extract and use oxygen is enhanced. This adaptation is further
augmented by increases in the level and activity of the enzymes
involved in oxidative metabolism (73) and a parallel increase in
glycogen (51, 53) and triglyceride (113) stores. Also worth noting is
that aerobic endurance training can spare muscle glycogen (less
glycogen use during exercise) and increase fat use within the
muscle, which helps prolong performance at the same exercise
348

intensity (71). The training induced an increase in fat use attributed
to 
the 
increase 
in 
fat-metabolizing 
enzymes 
and 
greater
mitochondrial respiratory capacity within the exercising muscles
(108).
Bone and Connective Tissue Adaptations
The selection of different forms of aerobic exercise has met with
some success in bringing about improvements in bone mass. Aerobic
programs that are the most successful in stimulating bone growth
involve more intense physical activities such as running and high-
intensity aerobics (12, 17). Running promotes bone growth more
effectively than other types of aerobic exercises such as cycling and
swimming. This is due to the repetitive high-impact loading that
occurs during running, in which the body experiences forces several
times its own weight. In contrast, cycling and swimming are weight-
supported activities that place minimal strain on the skeletal system,
resulting in less stimulation for bone growth (150). In fact, non-
weight-bearing aerobic exercise can reduce bone density, particularly
in areas not used to produce locomotion. For example, in a study
comparing athletes who were runners, cyclists, or both, it was
reported that individuals who were runners had greater total and leg
bone mineral density when compared to non-exercising control
participants, while cyclists had a reduced lower spine bone mineral
density than the non-exercising control group, and those in both
groups had greater total and arm bone mineral density compared to
non-exercising control participants (150). These findings suggest
that a sport like cycling may not produce enough strain to improve
bone mass not directly related to locomotion. As such, the inclusion
of other weight-bearing activities is likely warranted to help
counteract the potential reductions in bone mass associated with
non-weight-bearing activities (150). This research highlights that
skeletal adaptations brought about by aerobic endurance training are
specific to the activity undertaken and, more specifically, the axial
loading that the activity induces.
349

The key to the success of aerobic exercise in stimulating new
bone formation is that the activity must be significantly more intense
than the daily activities the person normally engages in so as to
exceed the minimum threshold intensity, as well as at a cyclical
strain to exceed the minimum and strain frequency for bone growth
(12). The intensity of the activity must systematically increase in
order to continually overload the bone. Eventually, it may become
difficult to overload bone through aerobic exercise when the oxygen
transport system rather than limitations of the musculoskeletal
system restricts the progression to new exercise intensity. Bone
responds to the magnitude and rate of external loading. Therefore,
to enhance the stimulus to the musculoskeletal system, it is also
necessary to increase the rate of limb movement. Using high-
intensity interval training techniques is one method of providing a
greater osteogenic stimulus while still providing the benefits
associated with aerobic exercise (14, 39). Another method to
increase the musculoskeletal system stimulus is to combine aerobic
endurance training with resistance training, a known stimulus for
improving bone mass (107), in what is commonly referred to as
concurrent training (146) (refer to chapter 21 for more
information).
In mature adults, the extent to which tendons, ligaments, and
cartilage grow and become stronger is proportional to the intensity
of the exercise stimulus, especially from weight-bearing activities
(119). Tendons and ligaments consist of bundles of collagen-
containing fibers that increase in number, size, and density following
consistent exercise stimulation (44). As with bone and muscle,
exercise intensity that consistently exceeds the strain placed on the
connective tissues during normal daily activities is needed to create
connective tissue changes. An example of the positive effects of
weight-bearing activity on cartilage is evidenced in a typical knee
joint, where the surfaces of the joint that experience the greatest
degree of weight bearing are thicker than the non-weight-bearing
surfaces (119). Complete movement through a full range of motion
350

during weight bearing is likely essential to maintain tissue viability
(148).
Aerobic exercise, particularly running, has received a lot of
research attention due not only to the health benefits it can provide
but also because of suggestions that habitual running can have a
negative impact on joints like the knees and hips, increasing the risk
of cartilage damage and osteoarthritis. While mixed or inconclusive
findings on the impact of running on knee health have been reported
(154), a study evaluating thousands of non-elite male and female
runners across the life span (ages from 12 to over 50) reported that
running did not increase the odds of knee pain or symptomatic knee
osteoarthritis (97). Similarly, a study has reported that running does
not increase the risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis compared to
non-running activities (98). In individuals without preexisting
osteoarthritis, running does not appear to harm the knees (98).
Moreover, some research suggests that running may even offer
protection against general knee pain (29). This protection may be
associated with the improved periarticular strength, not to mention
proprioception that comes with the running motion (98).
In studies of elite aerobic endurance-trained athletes, the results
are similar to those of lesser-trained runners. For example, in a
study of over 2,000 former elite athletes, it was found that those
from a power and mixed-sports background (e.g., soccer, basketball,
track and field) had an increased rate of hospital admissions for
premature osteoarthritis compared to aerobic endurance athletes
(e.g., long-distance runners), who also experienced admissions but
at a notably older age (90). A similar finding was reported in another
study of various former athletes including elite male aerobic
endurance and track and field athletes, where it was found that
aerobic endurance athletes reported fewer hip issues than control
subjects (78). It has been suggested that aerobic endurance athletes
may benefit from having a lower body mass index, which assists in
preventing osteoarthritis, along with having a more physically active
lifestyle, which may assist with a higher-than-average life
351

expectancy, thus explaining the later onset of osteoarthritis, if it
does occur (90). While these studies did not highlight any notable
differences in the outcomes between the elite and non-elite running
athletes, it has been suggested that the level of exposure may be a
risk factor for knee osteoarthritis (98), as a result of the duration,
intensity, and frequency of training.
Endocrine Adaptations
Just as endocrine responses to resistance training are needed for
muscle development (87), the changes in hormone production that
contribute to the body’s adaptation to aerobic exercise are equally
important (45, 46, 82, 108, 113). Testosterone, insulin, insulin-like
growth factors (IGF-1), and growth hormone affect the integrity of
muscle, bone, and connective tissue as well as assist in maintaining
metabolism within a normal range (40, 41, 84, 85, 158). The
endocrine adaptations following aerobic endurance training vary
according to the level of exercise intensity and duration, with some
hormonal responses increasing while others decrease, as outlined in
the following.
High-intensity aerobic training augments the absolute secretion
rates of many hormones in response to maximal exercise, although
trained athletes have attenuated hormonal responses to submaximal
exercise (103). However, the hormonal response of trained athletes
is similar to an untrained person when performing aerobic endurance
exercise at the same relative submaximal exercise intensity (108).
The greater hormonal response patterns to maximal exercise appear
to augment the athlete’s ability to tolerate and sustain prolonged
high-intensity exercise (170). When exercise intensity is very high
and exercise duration is very short (from 5-10 s), only “fight-or-
flight” changes in peripheral blood hormone concentrations occur
(e.g., epinephrine and norepinephrine concentrations increase) (86).
The key to endocrine responses, and hence adaptations for
aerobic endurance athletes, may be the interaction between training
variables such as volume and intensity plus the duration of the
352

activity and its influence on energy supply. Over the course of a
season, 
high-level 
male 
aerobic 
endurance 
runners’ 
basal
concentrations of certain hormones (e.g., testosterone and insulin)
may change and be more sensitive to variances in training
parameters such as intensity and distance run each week than
hormones such as cortisol (1). Further, these responses may also be
influenced 
by 
energy 
availability, 
with 
basal 
testosterone
concentrations decreasing for athletes who ran a greater number of
miles and had low energy availability (1). Additionally, research on
elite rowers has demonstrated that certain hormones (testosterone
and cortisol) may be more sensitive to changes in training volume
than hormones such as growth hormone (129). Also worth noting is
that low energy availability can affect the degree of protein
involvement in aerobic endurance exercise, particularly during bouts
of long duration (94). Therefore, consideration must be given over
the course of a season as to how the training variables are
manipulated and energy supplies are affected, not to mention how
an athlete recovers (i.e., type of recovery strategies employed
including nutrition), because these factors will determine the
endocrine response as well as the adaptations experienced during
and after training. An important point related to all this information
is what is known as relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). For
more detail, see chapter 11.
Aerobic training, especially running, is often associated with an
acute increase in net protein breakdown from the muscle (155),
brought about in part by acute stress-induced cortisol secretion
(142, 143) despite concomitant increases in anabolic hormones such
as testosterone and IGF-1 (160). However, evidence suggests that
net protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of aerobic endurance-trained
athletes does occur and may lead to muscle hypertrophy (81), but it
is most likely due to mitochondrial rather than contractile proteins
(161, 166). Further, the turnover rate of mitochondrial proteins and
myofibrillar proteins may be different, which may influence the
recovery capacity of the muscle after exercise (145). This may be
353

due to the impact that protein ingestion has on recovery following
different forms of aerobic endurance training such as high- and low-
intensity sessions; some evidence suggests that the combination of
these variables may alter the timing (i.e., give preference to one
pathway over another) and rate of muscle protein synthesis of
myofibrillar and mitochondrial proteins (145). Consequently, these
protein pathways can also be influenced by exercise–nutrient
interactions, especially in the early stages of recovery after exercise,
hence the importance of post-exercise recovery nutrition that
incorporates the ingestion of high-quality proteins in addition to
carbohydrates (145).
354

Adaptations to Aerobic Endurance
Training
Much research has been done on training adaptations associated
with aerobic endurance exercise (5, 15, 20, 34, 42, 65, 66, 161).
Aerobic metabolism plays a vital role in human performance and is
basic to all sports, if for no other reason than recovery (156).
Metabolically, the Krebs cycle and electron transport chain are the
main pathways in aerobic energy production. Aerobic metabolism
produces far more ATP energy than anaerobic metabolism and uses
fats, carbohydrates, and (minimally) proteins as fuel sources for
generating ATP. Many sports involve interactions between the
aerobic and anaerobic metabolic systems and thus require
appropriate training. For example, soccer, lacrosse, basketball, field
hockey, and ice hockey involve continuous movement (and thus
constant aerobic demand) mixed with bursts of sprint and power
activities. Proper conditioning of the aerobic system is vital to the
athlete’s ability to sustain such activity and adequately recover within
and between exercise sessions.
What Improvements in Performance
Result From Aerobic Exercise?
The body systems affected by aerobic exercise include musculoskeletal,
cardiovascular, and respiratory. Adaptations include the following:
•  Respiratory system. Decreased submaximal respiration rate (37).
•  Cardiovascular system. Decreased heart rate for fixed submaximal
workloads (131) associated with increased stroke volume and cardiac output.
Blood (plasma) volume is also increased, supporting increased stroke volume and
cardiac output (55). Hemoglobin mass also increases but not the percentage of
hemoglobin (i.e., hematocrit), which may decrease slightly due to the relatively
greater increase in plasma volume (140).
•  Musculoskeletal 
system. 
Increased 
arterial–venous 
O2 
difference
associated with increased capillarization in muscle (136, 153), increased oxidative
enzyme concentrations, and increased mitochondrial size and density (70).
355

•  Aerobic power (maximal oxygen uptake). Arguably the most significant
change in physiological variables with aerobic exercise training is an increase in
maximal oxygen uptake (V̇O2max), the criterion index of cardiovascular fitness.
The V̇O2max is determined in part by genetics and by the training program
undertaken by the athlete. Elite athletes may show minor changes in V̇O2max with
training (5%-10%), while untrained individuals may increase V̇O2max by as much
as 20% (67, 75). A high V̇O2max coupled with increased lactate threshold allows
enhanced performance for running sports as well as sports requiring intermittent
sprinting (soccer, basketball, and other team sports).
•  Lactate threshold. Aerobic training increases the absolute lactate threshold,
allowing the highly trained individual to work at both a higher relative and absolute
percentage of his or her V̇O2max than a less-trained individual. This increased
tolerance of lactate translates into a variety of performance outcomes; these
include running at a higher percentage of V̇O2max for a race (resulting in reduced
time), covering more distance during a game, enhanced recovery for second-half
performance, and working at higher exercise intensities throughout an event. The
importance of having a high lactate threshold can be seen in the following
example. Two individuals can have the same V̇O2max, perhaps 50 mL · kg−1 ·
min−1; however, if one has a lactate threshold of 80% of V̇O2max (i.e., threshold
occurs at 40 mL · kg−1 · min−1) whereas the other’s occurs at 70% (i.e., 35 mL ·
kg−1 · min−1), the first individual will be able to maintain a power output
equivalent to 5 mL · kg−1· min−1 higher than the second individual. All other things
being equal, such as exercise economy, this would result in a greater speed of
movement and thus superior performance.
•  Effective use of substrate. Carbohydrates are the preferred source of fuel
for high-intensity intermittent exercise in many team sports. Aerobic exercise
training results in a greater use of fat as a substrate for exercise with a relative
sparing of carbohydrate. With a sparing of carbohydrate (i.e., reduced glycogen
depletion), an aerobic endurance-trained individual can maintain higher-intensity
exercise for longer periods of time. Aerobic exercise may be further improved
through various carbohydrate-loading manipulations to increase endogenous
glycogen stores (19).
•  Muscle fiber adaptations. When muscle fibers are examined cross-
sectionally, elite distance runners have a higher proportion (percentage) of type I
fibers, and the available type I fibers are functionally very efficient for aerobic
metabolism (increased mitochondrial density and oxidative enzyme capacity [69]
and capillary network for oxygen delivery). Aerobic exercise training, especially
long-distance and high-intensity intermittent exercise, results in an increase in the
oxidative capacity of type I fibers. Research indicates that after a period of aerobic
endurance training such as marathon training, there is a shift toward type I fibers
associated with the higher volume of aerobic endurance training. The oxidative
phenotype type I/IIa fibers also increase, while type IIa and IIa/x decrease in both
vastus lateralis and soleus. However, it should be considered that certain muscles
356

may have a higher propensity for fiber shifting and other factors such as the
tapering or other phase of training may affect these shifts (125, 102). From a
performance standpoint, these metabolic and fiber changes result in a more
efficient use of aerobic energy production.
•  Exercise economy. The economy of exercise is mostly a function of
biomechanics and technique, which are influenced by the athlete’s metabolic,
cardiovascular, and neuromuscular efficiency and training (7). Two aerobic
endurance athletes may have the same maximal oxygen uptake and lactate
threshold yet not show the same performance outcomes. The athlete with better
economy would be able to race at a higher target pace or power for the same
amount of energy consumption, likely resulting in a better performance, even
though the two athletes have the same V̇O2max and lactate threshold (23).
Every athlete needs a basic level of aerobic endurance—if not for
performance, for health reasons—that can be achieved using a wide
variety of training modalities and programs (see chapter 21 for more
information). Apart from the stereotypical submaximal aerobic
training methods, another method that can produce significant gains
in aerobic fitness (e.g., increased V̇O2max, lactate threshold) is
interval training (16, 42, 92).
One of the most measured adaptations to aerobic endurance
training is an increase in maximal oxygen uptake associated with an
increase in maximal cardiac output (15, 31, 65, 161). As the
intensity of exercise increases, oxygen consumption rises to maximal
levels. When oxygen consumption can no longer increase to meet
the demands, maximal oxygen uptake has been achieved even in
the presence of continuing oxygen availability. Aerobic endurance
training can improve an athlete’s aerobic power by 5% to 30%,
depending, in part, on the starting fitness level as well as the genetic
potential of the individual (5). Most adaptations in maximal oxygen
consumption can be achieved within a 6- to 12-month training
period. 
After 
that, 
further 
changes 
in 
aerobic 
endurance
performance consist of increases in exercise economy and
increased lactate threshold (75). Metabolic changes include
increased respiratory capacity, lower blood lactate concentrations at
a given submaximal exercise intensity, increased mitochondrial and
357

capillary densities, and improved enzyme activity. It may be that
experienced athletes do not experience further increases in their
V̇O2max through chronic aerobic endurance training but that their
performance improves due to enhanced exercise economy (15, 66).
The intensity of training is one of the most important factors in
improving and maintaining aerobic power. Short, high-intensity bouts
of interval sprints can improve maximal oxygen uptake if the interim
rest period is also short. A repeated sprint-sequence interval
session can generally be defined as at least two short bouts of ≥10
seconds with a short recovery period of ≤60 seconds; however, this
will depend on the athletes’ goals (50). Callister and colleagues (20)
demonstrated that long rest periods used with sprints improve sprint
speed without significant increases in maximal aerobic power.
Therefore, longer training sessions with higher amounts of rest
between exercise bouts result in less improvement in aerobic
capacity. The use of shorter recovery periods between high-intensity
training intervals has been shown in various studies to improve
various skeletal muscle metabolic processes, resulting in improved
aerobic endurance performance (48).
Aerobic endurance training is generally associated with alterations
in body composition, assuming appropriate nutritional intake.
Aerobic endurance training usually decreases the relative percentage
of body fat but has little or no significant effect on fat-free mass.
Longer-term programs can result in greater decreases in the
percentage of body fat (15, 34, 73). Excessive training may lead to a
predominance of catabolic activity in the body and cause an
imbalance between catabolic and anabolic processes (141).
Aerobic endurance training results in reduced body fat,
increased maximal oxygen uptake, increased exercise
economy, increased respiratory capacity, lower blood
lactate 
concentrations 
at 
submaximal 
exercise,
increased mitochondrial and capillary densities, and
improved enzyme activity.
358

Table 6.2 lists the physiological changes that occur with short-
term (three- to six-month) aerobic endurance training and compares
the results for previously untrained and elite aerobic endurance
athletes.
359

External and Individual Factors
Influencing Adaptations to Aerobic
Endurance Training
A variety of external and individual factors can influence both the
acute responses and the chronic adaptations of the cardiovascular
and respiratory systems to exercise. The effects of altitude, heat,
hyperoxic breathing, smoking, vaping, and blood doping (external
factors), as well as genetic potential (individual factor), are briefly
described in this section.
Altitude
At elevations greater than 3,900 feet (1,189 m), acute physiological
adjustments begin to occur to compensate for the reduced partial
pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere (61). Figure 6.1 presents the
adjustments to altitude hypoxia that are immediate and longer
term. Two adjustments that occur early in the acclimatization
process are particularly important. First, there is an increase in
pulmonary ventilation (hyperventilation) at rest and during
exercise. This increase in ventilation is primarily the result of
increased breathing frequency. With longer stays at high elevation,
however, increased tidal volume also contributes to augmented
ventilation. Stabilization of ventilation is dependent on the level of
altitude and the duration at altitude (77). Second, in the early stages
of altitude exposure, cardiac output at rest and during submaximal
exercise increases, due primarily to increases in heart rate (61, 108).
Submaximal heart rate and cardiac output can increase 30% to 50%
above sea-level values, and stroke volume is constant or slightly
reduced. Increased submaximal cardiac output reflects the need for
increased blood flow at a time when arterial blood oxygen content is
reduced in order to maintain adequate oxygen delivery to the
tissues.
360

TABLE 6.2 Physiological Variables in Aerobic
Endurance Training
Variable
PREVIOUSLY
UNTRAINED
SUBJECTS
HIGHLY TRAINED OR
ELITE SUBJECTS
Before
After
Male
Female
HEART RATE (BEATS/MIN)
Resting (127, 135, 59)
76.4
57.0
45
51
Maximal (127, 135, 165)
192.8
190.8
196
193.9
STROKE VOLUME (ML)
Resting (135, 169)
79
76
147
133
Maximal (135, 169, 165)
104
120
187
129.6
CARDIAC OUTPUT (L/MIN)
Resting (135, 169, 149)
5.7
4.4
8.2
6.7
Maximal (135, 169, 165)
20.0
22.8
33.8
23.5
Heart volume (mL) (127, 135, 149)
860
895
1104
859
BLOOD PRESSURE (MMHG) (127, 135)
Resting (127, 135)
131/75
144/78
112/75
115/70
Maximal (127, 127a, 135)
204/81
201/74
188/77
180/74
PULMONARY VENTILATION (BODY TEMPERATURE [37 °C] AND PRESSURE
[AMBIENT], SATURATED [47 MMHG]) (L/MIN)
Resting (127, 135)
10.9
12.0
11.8
—
Maximal (56a, 127, 135)
128.7
156.4
164.4
120
ARTERIOVENOUS OXYGEN
DIFFERENCE (ML/100 ML)
Resting (165)
5.8
7.5
—
—
Maximal (135, 169, 165)
16.2
17.1
15.9
17.6
*Data are not from a training study; subjects were untrained or “good distance runners.”
Data compiled by Carwyn Sharp and Kate Baldwin.
361

Maximal oxygen uptake (mL · kg−1
· min−1) (127, 135, 18, 74)
36.0
48.0
90.6
72.8
% type I fibers (3, 24, 59)
48
51
60.8
60.4-61.8
FIBER AREA (μM2)
Type I (35)
4,947*
6,284*
6,485
6,069
Type II (35)
5,460*
6,378*
8,342
5,642
CAPILLARY DENSITY
Number/mm2 (3, 63)
289
356
640
—
Number/fiber (3)
1.39
1.95
2.15
—
SKELETAL MUSCLE ENZYMES
Citrate synthase (μmol · min−1·
g−1 wet weight) (162)
35.9
45.1
—
—
Lactate dehydrogenase (μmol · g−1
· min−1) (35, 24)
843*
788*
746
744
Succinate dehydrogenase (μmol ·
g−1 · min−1) (35)
6.4*
17.7*
21.6
10.0
Phosphofructokinase (μmol · g−1 ·
min−1) (52, 53)
27.13
58.82
20.1
—
MAXIMAL FIBER SHORTENING VELOCITY (FIBER LENGTHS)
Type I (61, 157)
0.99
1.27
1.65
—
Type II (61, 157)
3.18
3.38
3.72
—
*Data are not from a training study; subjects were untrained or “good distance runners.”
Data compiled by Carwyn Sharp and Kate Baldwin.
Within 10 to 14 days at a given altitude, heart rate and cardiac
output begin to return to normal values because of the longer-term
acclimatization response of increased red blood cell production.
Thus, with acute exposure to altitude, hyperventilation and
increased submaximal cardiac output are rapid and relatively
effective responses to offset the challenges of the reduced partial
362

pressure of oxygen. However, despite these adjustments, during this
acute period, arterial oxygen saturation decreases and results in
decreases in maximal oxygen uptake and aerobic performance at
altitudes above 3,900 feet (1,189 m). Acclimatization changes revert
in about one month after return to sea level. As indicated in figure
6.1, chronic physiological and metabolic adjustments that occur
during a prolonged altitude exposure include
increased formation of hemoglobin (generally 5%-15%
increase, although higher values have been reported) and red
blood cells (30%-50% increase),
increased diffusing capacity of oxygen through the pulmonary
membranes,
maintenance of the acid–base balance of body fluids by renal
excretion of HCO3− and through hyperventilation, and
increased capillarization.
All these adaptations generally improve tolerance of the relative
hypoxia at medium and high altitudes (58, 61, 108) and may result
in nearly sea-level exercise capacities with adequate acclimatization.
A minimum of three to six weeks is needed to adapt at moderate
altitude (2,200 to 3,000 ft [608 to 914 m]). However, reduced
performance, compared to sea level, is generally expected with
altitude exposure regardless of the period of acclimatization.
Strength and conditioning professionals are encouraged to inform
athletes of both expected acute responses and chronic adaptations
to altitude so that they can maintain appropriately adjusted training
regimens and a positive mental approach to the impact of altitude.
363

FIGURE 6.1 A summary of the immediate and long-term adjustments to altitude hypoxia.
Heat Acclimatization
The physiologic responses to aerobic exercise depend on the
environmental conditions in which an athlete is exercising.
Consequently, high environmental temperatures and humidity cause
significant alterations to heart rate, oxygen uptake, minute
ventilation, and blood lactate responses and, ultimately, performance
due to interactions between the environmental conditions and an
athlete’s thermoregulatory systems (117). If these environmental
conditions are hot and dry or warm/hot and humid and produce a
sufficient level of heat stress, performance can be impaired due to a
cascade of thermoregulatory responses including an increase in
sweat rate and blood flow to the skin to facilitate greater heat
transfer to the environment. Such a process is in competition with
increasing skeletal muscle blood flow to meet the metabolic
demands of active muscle (54) and thus restrains blood flow
364

availability for oxygen and nutrient delivery and metabolic by-
product removal in exercising muscle. If this process continues long
enough without sufficient fluid intake, dehydration can result, further
compounding the issue and putting the athlete under greater
physiological and thermoregulatory stress, leading to further
compromised performance (54). However, repeated exposure over a
long period of time (often referred to as natural exposure) to a hot
environment can result in thermoregulatory and physiological
adaptations referred to as heat acclimatization, which can
improve an athlete’s heat tolerance (10). An athlete can undertake
heat acclimation protocols (often referred to as artificial exposure)
to expose the body to such hot environments, thereby raising core
and skin temperatures and increase sweating to elicit the same
adaptations (124).
The 
body 
undergoes 
a 
number 
of 
well-known 
chronic
thermoregulatory and physiological changes during the heat
acclimatization process. These adaptations include an earlier onset
of sweating in conjunction with an increase in sweat rate and
evaporative cooling, a reduction in resting and exercising skin and
core body temperature, an expansion in plasma volume and hence
an increase in blood volume, a reduction in resting and exercising
heart rate, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (49). A
summary of the adaptations to thermoregulatory and performance
physiology following aerobic exercise in the heat are outlined in
figure 6.2.
365

FIGURE 6.2 A summary of the adaptations to thermoregulatory and performance
physiology following aerobic exercise in the heat.
Reprinted from O.R. Gibson, C.A. Mee, J.A. Willmott, et al., “Heat Alleviation Strategies for Athletic Performance: A
Review and Practitioner Guidelines,” Temperature 7, no. 1 (2019): 3-36. © 2019 The Authors. Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The benefit of these physiological adaptations is that the athlete
not only has an improved heat tolerance ability via an improved
thermoregulatory system, but such adaptations have also been
found to improve time-trial performance (57, 99) and improve
maximal oxygen uptake and power output at lactate threshold (99).
Additionally, the athlete’s perception of effort and level of thermal
comfort have also been found to be improved following heat
acclimation (49). However, in a review by Rahimi and colleagues
(130) of the physiological responses to heat acclimation across 11
randomized controlled trials with 215 participants, it was reported
that heat acclimation was effective for improving time-trial
366

performance as well as reducing time-trial heart rate and maximal
heart rate, despite there being no beneficial effect on maximal
oxygen uptake, core or mean skin temperature, plasma volume, or
blood lactate, nor meaningful effects on rating of perceived exertion
or thermal comfort. The differences between studies and whether
improvements were observed with respect to heat acclimation may
be related to the environmental conditions (i.e., warm or hot, dry or
humid), intensity of the exercise used, the acclimation protocols that
the athletes were exposed to, and the initial level of athlete
acclimation, all of which determine the degree of thermoregulatory
and physiological adaptations (124).
Heat acclimation adaptations start to occur quickly once exposed
to the hot environment and continue for the duration of the process.
However, it needs to be noted that heat acclimation adaptations do
not all occur at the same rate, with some occurring more quickly
than others and some (e.g., sweat rate) continuing as the
acclimation period continues (124). The time course of the
physiological adaptations to heat acclimation are outlined in figure
6.3. The physiological changes to the thermoregulatory system start
to occur very quickly, commencing from the first day of exposure
(124) and continuing over subsequent days, with the majority of the
adaptations (~75%) reported to occur within the first four to six
days (121).
Unfortunately, heat acclimation–induced thermoregulatory and
physiological adaptations are transient and relatively short-term, and
after leaving the hot environment the changes start to dissipate after
only a few days or weeks depending on the length of the exposure
(47). While a lot is known about the heat acclimation process,
considerably less is known about the decay rate of the adaptations
(49). Originally, it was proposed that for each day of a heat
acclimation protocol, the adaptation would be retained for two days
(96). However, more recent research indicates that for every day
that passes without exposure to the heat, there is a 2.5% loss of
adaptations (28). The adaptations also decay at different rates and
367

coincide with the rate of adaptation; that is, those that adapted
quickly also decay quickly (122). Typically, full heat acclimation
adaptations are expected to be lost after a month if there is no
repeated exercise heat stress (128). It also appears that the loss of
adaptations may be affected by the level of exercise undertaken
after heat acclimation. Consequently, it is recommended that
athletes maintain their training in the days after heat acclimation to
assist retaining their thermoregulatory and physiological adaptations
(128).
It has also been reported that the heat acclimation adaptations
may remain longer for those athletes acclimatized in dry, hot
environments compared to humid, hot environments (121).
Unfortunately, 
little 
research 
has 
been 
conducted 
on 
the
transferability of adaptations between different hot environments
(e.g., hot and dry to warm and humid). However, in one of the few
studies to investigate this aspect of heat acclimation, it was found
that cross-adaptation from one environment to the other is
achievable (56), an important point worth noting for athletes who
train and compete in different hot environments.
368

FIGURE 6.3 The time course of the physiological adaptations to heat acclimation.
Reprinted by permission from J.D. Périard, S. Racinais, and M.N. Sawka, “Adaptations and Mechanisms of Human Heat
Acclimation: Applications for Competitive Athletes and Sports,” Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports,
25 (2015).
Two other factors to consider with respect to heat acclimation are
the influence of the level of aerobic fitness and biological sex. There
is evidence to suggest that athletes who have a higher level of
aerobic fitness have a greater ability to exercise in the heat due to
the ability to tolerate higher core body temperatures (124) and may
also better retain their heat acclimation adaptations (121). With
respect to sex, differences are observed in the physiological
responses to exercise in the heat between males and females.
Females have been found to experience greater increases in body
temperature in the heat due to a lower total body sweat response
when compared to males (43). This difference in sweat rate is
attributed to a smaller increase in sweat rate for a given increase in
body temperature (i.e., lower thermosensitivity) (43). It has also
been observed that while both females and males respond to short-
term heat acclimation protocols, females may require a slightly
longer protocol to establish thermoregulatory and cardiovascular
stability (111).
369

With this information in mind, strength and conditioning
professionals need to consider the type of heat acclimation protocol
that they will employ, the proximity of the heat acclimation protocol
to the athlete’s competition, and the training status and sex of the
athlete with whom they are working, in order to maximize the
potential benefits from the acclimation environment to the
competition environment. More information on heat acclimation
protocols and the different types and considerations when
implementing such protocols are outlined in chapter 21.
Altitude or Heat: Which Training Protocol
Should an Athlete Undertake?
Before answering this question, it is important to understand how
the two types of training protocols differ in terms of adaptations.
Heat acclimation training has become popular with aerobic
endurance athletes, often as an alternative to altitude training due to
less expense and easier access to hot versus altitude training
environments. While evidence suggests that heat acclimation can
improve maximal oxygen uptake in thermoneutral (164) and hot
environments (99, 163) as well as performance in thermoneutral
(112) and hot environments (57, 99), the changes are not due to the
same physiological mechanisms brought about by altitude training
(hypoxic exposure).
Training at altitude causes exposure to a hypobaric-hypoxic
environment and a reduction in an athlete’s arterial oxygen content,
which sets off a sequence of events starting with an increase in the
amount of hypoxia-inducible factor and the subsequent expression
of the genes associated with the transcription of erythropoietin
(EPO) and nitric oxide (6). The increased concentrations of EPO
bring about changes in red cell volume and hemoglobin mass, which
increase the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood as well as
increase the arteriovenous oxygen difference, which can provide an
improvement in maximal aerobic capacity and subsequent aerobic
endurance performance (6). In comparison, heat acclimation training
370

targets changes in the thermoregulatory system via increases in core
body temperature, which in turn brings about a reduction in central
venous pressure and renal perfusion and subsequent increase in
aldosterone secretion (6). The result of this process is a sudden and
large expansion in plasma volume, which in turn increases stroke
volume and hence is proposed to improve maximal aerobic capacity
and subsequent aerobic endurance performance (6). A graphical
representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms of altitude
training and heat acclimation training and their subsequent effect on
aerobic endurance exercise performance is provided in figure 6.4.
In view of the potential benefits to both altitude and heat training
as outlined above, one might think that completing both forms of
training together would provide an athlete with the best of both
worlds—that is, erythropoiesis from hypoxia stimulation and
plasma volume expansion from heat acclimation. Unfortunately, the
answer is not that simple, for altitude training can evoke an acute
reduction in plasma volume, which is in contrast with the expansion
of plasma volume experienced with heat acclimation (118). In
addition, the time course of adaptations to altitude (hypoxic
exposure) and heat acclimation appears to be different, with hypoxia
exposure generally requiring slightly longer exposure times
compared to heat acclimation (60).
Research has been conducted to investigate the efficacy of
combining the two forms of training (i.e., heat acclimation with
hypoxic exposure) on performance in a hot environment using
trained runners (109). Even though heat training combined with
living-high/training-low hypoxia produced a greater physiological
stress, the thermoregulatory adaptations for the combined group
compared to an independent heat training group were limited and
found to provide no additional physiological benefit when exercising
in a hot environment (109). A similar study by Hanson and
colleagues (60) comparing a heat acclimation–alone group with a
group combining heat and hypoxia exposure on cycling endurance
performance in a hot environment observed similar improvements in
371

performance for short-duration exercise across the groups. The
results of these studies suggest that even though the physiological
adaptations to altitude and heat training may be different, hypoxic
exposure does not provide any additional benefit above and beyond
heat acclimation as it relates to exercise performance in the heat,
nor does it impair heat acclimation.
In light of these research findings, which training protocol
(altitude or heat) should an athlete complete? In answering this
question, it is important to remember two points. First,
nonhematological adaptations are directly related to the stresses of
the training environment, and second, the nonhematological
adaptations to both altitude and heat are specific to the environment
in which the athlete will compete (118). Or put another way, what is
going to have the biggest impact on the athlete’s performance on
race day, altitude or heat? For example, if an athlete was preparing
for a marathon to be held at an altitude of 2,500 to 3,000 meters
(8,202-9,843 ft), the answer would be altitude, because the athlete
would notice the change in atmospheric pressure at that altitude if
he or she were from a sea-level environment. However, if the athlete
was preparing for a marathon at sea level but in a warm to hot and
humid environment and notably above his or her temperate, dry
training environment, he or she would be best served by
undertaking a heat acclimation protocol. Consequently, it is
necessary to compare the training and competition environments
and consider the athlete’s current level of adaptations to determine
what adaptations should be optimized to improve performance on
race day. Irrespective of the training method selected to prepare an
athlete for competition, establishing how each athlete adapts and
providing individualized programs to optimize adaptations is
important, because not all athletes will respond to altitude and heat
protocols the same (118).
372

FIGURE 6.4 A graphical representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms of
altitude and heat acclimation training and their subsequent effect on aerobic endurance
exercise performance. Erythropoietin = EPO; nitric oxide = NO; red cell volume = RCV;
vascular endothelial growth factor = VEGF; hypoxia-inducible factor alpha = HIF-α; maximal
aerobic capacity = V̇O2max; arteriovenous oxygen difference = a-vO2 diff. Solid lines
indicate well-established relationship and dashed lines indicate limited evidence supporting
the relationship.
Adapted by permission from M.N. Baranauskas, K. Constantini, H.L. Paris, et al., “Heat Versus Altitude Training for
Endurance Performance at Sea Level,” Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 49, no. 1 (2021): 50-58.
373

Hyperoxic Breathing
Breathing oxygen-enriched gas mixtures (hyperoxic breathing)
during rest periods or following exercise can result in short-term
improvements in oxygen transport, lactate metabolism, power
output, and work tolerance when compared to normoxic
breathing (21). In contrast, studies examining the systematic
supplementation of hyperoxic breathing during aerobic endurance
training over time show contradictory results and overall small
benefits (21). Hyperoxic breathing has been proposed to increase
the amount of oxygen carried by the blood and therefore increase
the supply of oxygen to working muscles and reduce central fatigue
(21). However, the breathing of ambient air at sea level by healthy
people results in arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation between
95% to 98%. Thus, the potential for hyperoxic breathing during rest
periods or following exercise has yet to be fully elucidated (58, 126).
Smoking and Vaping
Relatively little research is available regarding smoking and exercise
performance, possibly because athletes and active individuals may
tend to avoid smoking for fear of impairing performance or
increasing disease risk (100, 123). However, based on the available
evidence, it is clear that smokers experience lower oxygen uptake,
impaired heart rate responses to exercise, and a decrease in
muscular endurance compared with nonsmokers (9, 91). Smokers
experience impairments in lung function and are at increased risk for
chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (104, 148) including chronic
bronchitis (79) and emphysema (101). Decrements in exercise
tolerance and cardiopulmonary function have been observed in
teenagers (100), demonstrating that the harmful effects of smoking
occur in even young smokers within a relatively short period of time.
The detrimental effects of smoking include
increased airway resistance due to nicotine-related bronchiole
constriction or increased fluid secretion and swelling in the
374

bronchial tree due to the irritation of smoke; and
paralysis of the cilia on the surfaces of the respiratory tract by
nicotine, which limits the ability to remove excess fluids and
foreign particles, causing debris to accumulate in the
respiratory passageways and adding to the difficulty of
breathing.
Thus, even the light smoker may feel respiratory strain during
exercise and experience a reduction in the level of performance (58,
108).
Carbon monoxide, a component of cigarette smoke, is associated
with an impaired hemodynamic response to exercise and increased
catecholamine release. Carbon monoxide has a higher affinity for
hemoglobin than does oxygen. The resulting carboxyhemoglobin
(carbon monoxide and hemoglobin) reduces the amount of oxygen
that can be carried by hemoglobin and thus reduces the oxygen that
can be provided to the working muscles. The reduction in oxygen-
carrying capacity may reduce maximal exercise capacity, and
submaximal cardiovascular responses may increase in an effort to
provide adequate oxygenated blood to the working muscles. The
increased catecholamine release increases heart rate and blood
pressure.
Vaping refers to the act of inhaling an aerosol often containing
nicotine and flavoring through a device, commonly known as an e-
cigarette or vape pen, which heats a liquid to generate vapor
without the combustion associated with traditional cigarette
smoking. Vaping is currently the most common modality of nicotine
consumption in young people, with 27.5% of high school students in
2019 in the United States reportedly vaping (133). The toxicants
found in vapors are reportedly lower in quantity when compared to
traditional cigarette smoking; however, adverse short-term side
effects on the respiratory system have been reported. Research
examining the chronic effects of vaping on lung health and long-
term exercise performance is extremely limited due to the relatively
new widespread uptake of vaping. Currently, no large-scale
375

prospective cohort study has examined the link between vaping and
long-term adverse respiratory outcomes. This is further complicated
by the large spectrum of vaping options including various flavors,
additives, and nicotine concentrations. However, in vaping products
that contain nicotine (over 99% of products), the nicotine-stimulated
catecholamine release can activate receptors in the heart and result
in an increased heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility
and workload and, in the long term, can result in changes in
cardiovascular physiology and the development of heart failure and
other associated chronic health issues (133).
Studies examining short-term side effects of vaping report
inflammation and cellular damage in the lungs, leading to decreased
lung capacity and impaired gas exchange (22, 151), which may in
turn affect performance and recovery times during exercise.
However, whether these changes are maintained over the long term
and after vaping cessation is still yet to be established. Studies also
demonstrate that both acute and subacute vaping can exacerbate
both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and induce
physiological changes in the airways and immune system (159),
which can negatively affect performance and recovery in athletes.
Very few studies have examined the effect of vaping directly on
aerobic endurance exercise. In young, healthy adults, regular vaping
use significantly reduced cardiorespiratory fitness, measured by
V̇O2peak when compared to nonvapers of the same demographic
(142a). The young adults also demonstrated lower chronotropic
responses and reduced O2 extraction and use during exercises
compared to nonusers. In addition, significantly slower 2-mile (3.1
km) run times have been reported in vape users compared to
nonvapers, with times also being slower compared to traditional
cigarette smokers (30). Additionally, vaping can cause short-term
increases in heart rate and diastolic blood pressure primarily by the
systemic release of catecholamines (144).
376

Blood Doping
The practice of artificially increasing red blood cell mass (blood
doping) as a means to improve athletic performance has been
criticized as unethical and as one that poses serious health risks to
the athlete (120). Nonetheless, research has suggested that this
practice can improve aerobic exercise performance and may enhance
tolerance of certain environmental conditions (138).
Blood doping can be accomplished through infusion of an
individual’s own red blood cells or those from someone else, or
through administration of EPO, which stimulates red blood cell
production. Infusion of red blood cells rapidly increases red blood
cell mass but for just a few weeks (116), whereas EPO takes longer
to cause an increase in red blood cell production but the effect lasts
as long as EPO is administered (138). In either case, it is theorized
that increasing red blood cell mass increases the blood’s ability to
carry oxygen and thus increases oxygen availability to working
muscles. Maximal oxygen uptake has been demonstrated to increase
by up to 11% with either red blood cell infusion or EPO
administration (138, 139). At standardized submaximal workloads,
blood doping has also been associated with decreased heart rate
and blood lactate as well as higher pH values (138).
The effects of blood doping suggest the potential for diminishing
the impact of various environmental conditions. The effects of
altitude appear to be lessened with blood doping, although as
altitude increases, the positive influence of blood doping is reduced
(132). Environmental stressors such as heat and cold exposure may
also be affected by blood doping. During heat exposure, a blood-
doped athlete will be able to tolerate submaximal exercise stress
more easily (76, 137-139). The increased blood volume associated
with increased red blood cell mass allows the body to shunt more
blood to the skin for improved thermoregulation while still providing
sufficient blood to transport oxygen to the working muscles.
However, blood doping appears to confer these benefits primarily to
individuals who are already acclimatized to heat and provides very
377

little aid relating to the response to heat of those who are not
acclimatized (138). Much less is known about blood doping with
respect to cold stress, and although some theoretical benefit has
been suggested, this practice could conceivably increase health risks
(138).
The health risks associated with blood doping further complicate
the controversy surrounding this practice. Theoretically, high
hematocrit levels may increase risks for embolic events such as
stroke, myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis, or pulmonary
embolism. Increased arterial blood pressure, flu-like symptoms, and
increased plasma potassium levels may present themselves with EPO
use (139). Finally, there is risk associated with infusion or
transfusion, although in most cases the risk is relatively small (139).
Genetic Potential
The upper limit of an individual’s genetic potential contributes
significantly to the absolute magnitude of the training adaptations.
The magnitude of change also depends on the current training
status of the individual. Each biological system adaptation, such as
that of the cardiovascular system, has an upper limit, and as the
athlete gets closer to that upper limit, smaller and smaller gains are
observed. For example, in some elite competitions (e.g., swimming),
small gains in performance may be the difference between the gold
medal and 26th place. Thus, in an event in which tenths or
hundredths of a second make a big difference, it may be worth the
extra training time to gain that 0.05% improvement in performance.
Because of the small gains possible with training in elite athletes,
careful program design and monitoring become even more critical
(34, 83, 89, 168).
378

Detraining
Detraining is defined as the partial or complete loss of training-
induced adaptations in response to an insufficient training stimulus
(114, 115). Detraining is governed by the principle of training
reversibility, which states that whereas physical training results in
several physiological adaptations that enhance athletic performance,
stopping or markedly reducing training induces a partial or complete
reversal of these adaptations, compromising athletic performance. A
distinction needs to be made with regard to cessation of training
that results in a reversal of adaptations and tapering. Tapering is
the planned reduction of volume of training (usually in duration and
frequency but not intensity) that occurs before an athletic
competition or a planned recovery microcycle. This type of reduction
in training is designed to enhance athletic performance and
adaptations.
Aerobic endurance adaptations are most sensitive to periods of
inactivity because of their enzymatic basis. The exact cellular
mechanisms that dictate detraining changes are unknown, and
further research is needed to clarify the underlying physiological
alterations. Two review articles (114, 115) address the factors that
contribute to aerobic performance, most importantly V̇O2max and
the factors determining V̇O2max (cardiac output and arteriovenous
oxygen difference) and the impact of detraining. The authors discuss
the impact of short-term (four weeks) (114) and long-term (more
than four weeks) (115) detraining. In highly trained athletes,
maximal oxygen uptake is reduced 4% to 14% with short-term (27,
106) and 6% to 20% with long-term detraining (26, 33, 106). The
reduction in V̇O2max is primarily a result of decreased blood volume
(25), decreased stroke volume (25, 26), decreased maximal cardiac
output (25, 26), and increased submaximal heart rate (25, 31, 33,
105). The decrease in V̇O2max supports the loss of aerobic
endurance performance (25, 26, 31, 33, 72, 105).
379

Proper 
exercise 
variation, 
intensity, 
maintenance
programs, and active recovery periods can adequately
protect against serious detraining effects (36).
380

Conclusion
Aerobic endurance exercise produces many acute cardiovascular and
respiratory responses, and aerobic endurance training produces
many chronic adaptations. This information can be of particular
value for developing the goals of a conditioning program and can
provide a basis for clinical evaluation and the selection of parameters
to be included in such an evaluation process. Knowledge of
cardiovascular, respiratory, nervous, muscular, bone and connective
tissue, and endocrine system responses to aerobic endurance
training can help the strength and conditioning professional
understand the scientific basis for aerobic conditioning and the
adaptations to expect and monitor during training. Adaptations to
specific types of exercise stimuli take place in the body. Optimal
adaptations reflect careful design, implementation, and performance
of strength and conditioning programs.
KEY TERMS
acclimatization
blood doping
bradycardia
carboxyhemoglobin
concurrent training
critical power
decay rate
detraining
erythropoiesis
erythropoietin (EPO)
exercise economy
heat acclimation
heat acclimatization
hemoglobin
hybrid fiber
381

hyperoxic breathing
hyperventilation
hypoxia
lactate threshold
mitochondria
myoglobin
normoxic breathing
onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)
repeated sprint-sequence interval session
tapering
thermoneutral
vaping
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not a physiological adaptation to
aerobic endurance training?
  a.  stroke volume increases
  b.  submaximal heart rate decreases
  c.  exercise economy increases
  d.  fat oxidation decreases
  2.  During the heat acclimatization process, which of the following
chronic physiological thermoregulatory and performance
changes does an athlete not experience?
  a.  increase in plasma volume
  b.  reduced lactate concentration
  c.  decrease in evaporative cooling
  d.  decrease in exercise core temperature
  3.  Which of the following statements is not true concerning
altitude and heat training?
  a.  The time course of adaptations to altitude and heat
acclimation appears to be different, with altitude training
generally requiring slightly longer exposure times
compared to heat acclimation.
382

  b.  Heat environments cause exposure to a hypoxic
environment and a reduction in an athlete’s arterial
oxygen content.
  c.  Heat and altitude training adaptations occur in response to
different physiological mechanisms.
  d.  Heat acclimation training targets changes in the
thermoregulatory system via increases in core body
temperature.
  4.  Which of the following short-term effects is seen after vaping?
  a.  increases in heart rate and diastolic blood pressure
  b.  decreases in heart rate and systolic blood pressure
  c.  an improvement in systemic inflammation
  d.  there are no short-term negative effects from vaping
5. Which of the following is not a benefit seen from hyperoxic
breathing?
a. short-term improvements in oxygen transport
b. short-term improvements in lactate metabolism
c. short-term improvements in power output
d. short-term improvements in exercise economy
383
