CHAPTER 7
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES
AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS
FOR RESISTANCE TRAINING
Rhodri S. Lloyd, PhD, Sylvia Moeskops, PhD, and
Avery D. Faigenbaum, EdD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the merits of adopting a long-term approach to the
development of athleticism for child and adolescent
populations;
evaluate the evidence regarding the safety, effectiveness, and
importance of resistance exercise for youth populations;
describe the effects of aging on musculoskeletal health and
performance;
explore the trainability of older adults and the benefits of
exercise, including resistance training in aging populations; and
explain why adaptations to resistance exercise vary greatly
among these distinct populations.
Resistance exercise has been proven to be a safe and effective
method of conditioning for individuals with various needs, goals, and
abilities. Resistance training is also recognized as a fundamental
384

component of long-term athletic development that helps to support
lifelong participation in sport and recreational physical activity from
childhood to the more senior years of life (137). In light of its many
benefits for all individuals, resistance exercise for youth (137) and
older people (76) has received increasing public and medical
attention. However, when designing and evaluating resistance
training programs, strength and conditioning professionals need to
understand the implications of age-related differences in body
composition, muscular performance, trainability, and injury risk to
facilitate individualized exercise prescription.
For the purposes of this chapter, resistance exercise is defined
as a specialized method of conditioning whereby an individual is
working against a wide range of resistive loads to enhance health,
fitness, and performance. This term should be distinguished from
the sport of weightlifting, in which individuals attempt to lift maximal
amounts of weight in competition, specifically in the clean and jerk
and snatch exercises. The term childhood refers to a period of life
before the development of secondary sex characteristics (e.g., pubic
hair and reproductive organs), and the term adolescence refers to
the period between childhood and adulthood. For ease of
discussion, the term youth or young athlete refers to both
children and adolescents. The terms older and senior include men
and women over 65 years of age. Athleticism reflects the ability to
repeatedly execute a variety of movements with precision and
confidence in a range of environments, which require appropriate
levels of motor skill competency, balance, coordination, strength,
power, speed, agility, and endurance (137). The development of
athleticism is important for everyone and should not be reserved as
an outcome goal only for those involved in organized sport.
385

Youth Populations
The National Strength and Conditioning Association considers long-
term athletic development as the development of athleticism
over time, with an aim to enhance physical fitness, reduce injury
risk, and improve mental and physical health and well-being (137).
The concept of regularly participating in activities that enhance
athleticism is relevant for people of all ages. However, over the past
two decades, there has been a growing focus on long-term athletic
development programs, particularly for youth populations (137).
Athletic development models that encompass multiple modes of
training have been proposed previously in the literature. For
example, Lloyd and Oliver (141) proposed the youth physical
development (YPD) model, which provides training guidelines for
males and females (figure 7.1a and 7.1b). The YPD model is based
on the notion that all components of fitness are trainable at all
stages of development, and therefore training programs should be
multifaceted in nature to develop multiple dimensions of athleticism.
Crucially, the model promotes a consistent focus on the
simultaneous development of muscle strength and motor skill
competency, which provide the foundations for overall athleticism
(137). The model also supports children engaging in some form of
physical activity and preparatory conditioning early in life to take
advantage of the heightened neuroplasticity associated with early
childhood development (88). Similarly, training prescription should
transition from low structure and movement exploration early in a
child’s development to a more structured and targeted approach as
individuals accumulate training experience and move toward later
stages of development.
However, several authors have also established more detailed
development models for individual components of fitness, such as
agility (144), speed (176), power (155), and endurance (104), and
specific modes of training, such as motor skills (194), resistance
training (91), plyometrics (140), and weightlifting (168). While each
386

model focuses on bespoke elements of athletic development, several
notable commonalities exist between models: (a) Children should be
exposed to a wide range of training activities that target motor skill
development and muscular strength, (b) training should begin simple
and become more advanced as children progress through the
various stages of development, and (c) training should be generic to
start with and then become more specialized over time as workloads
and training exposure increase.
Collectively, strength and conditioning programs effectively
promote the development of athleticism in both children and
adolescents (141). In particular, leading international consensus (17,
137, 139, 215) and seminal meta-analytical data (132, 134) have
indicated the effectiveness of resistance training in enhancing
multiple components of fitness in youth populations. While the
effectiveness of resistance training in youth is unequivocal, it is
important for strength and conditioning professionals to understand
how the fundamental principles of growth, maturation, and
development can affect training adaptations, confound interpretation
of testing or monitoring data, and can influence the development
and evaluation of safe and effective resistance training programs.
Because youth sports training has become more intense and
complex (21), anatomical, physiological, and psychosocial factors
that may be associated with acute and chronic injury also need to be
considered.
The Growing Child
In this section, the terms growth, development, and maturation
are used to describe changes that occur in the body throughout life.
The term growth refers to an increase in body size or a particular
body part; development describes the natural progression from
prenatal life to adulthood; and maturation is defined as progress
toward a fully mature state, which varies in timing, tempo, and
magnitude between different bodily systems (142). Puberty refers
to a period of time in which secondary sex characteristics develop
387

and a child transitions to young adulthood. During puberty, changes
also occur in body composition and the performance of physical
skills, with such changes varying markedly between individuals.
388

389

FIGURE 7.1 The youth physical development model for (a) males and (b) females. Font
size refers to importance; light blue and light red boxes refer to preadolescent periods of
adaptation; dark blue and dark red boxes refer to adolescent periods of adaptation. FMS:
fundamental movement skills; MC: metabolic conditioning; PHV: peak height velocity; SSS:
sport-specific skills; YPD: youth physical development.
Adapted by permission from R.S. Lloyd and J.L. Oliver, “The Youth Physical Development Model: A New Approach to
Long-Term Athletic Development,” Strength and Conditioning Journal 34, no. 3 (2012): 61-72.
Chronological Age Versus Biological Maturation
Because of considerable variation in the rates of growth and
development, it is not particularly accurate to define a stage of
maturation or development by age in months or years, which is
known as chronological age. Children do not grow at a constant
rate, and there are substantial interindividual differences in physical
development at any given chronological age. For example, a group
of 14-year-old children can have a height difference as great as 9
inches (23 cm) and a weight difference up to 40 pounds (18 kg),
while an 11-year-old girl may be taller and more physically skilled
than an 11-year-old boy. These differences correspond to variations
in the timing, tempo, and magnitude of maturation (142). The onset
of puberty can vary from 8 to 13 years in girls and from 9 to 15
years in boys, with girls beginning puberty approximately two years
before boys.
Given 
the 
limitations 
associated 
with 
chronological 
age,
development can be better assessed by biological maturation,
which can be measured in terms of skeletal age, sexual maturation,
or somatic (physique) maturation. The assessment of maturation in
children is important for several reasons. Maturity assessment can
be used to evaluate growth and development patterns in children. In
addition, since the degree of maturation is related to measures of
fitness, including muscular strength and motor skill performance
(120), techniques used to assess maturation can help ensure that
children are more fairly matched for fitness testing and athletic
competition, as opposed to being grouped according to chronological
age. In adequately nourished children there is no scientific evidence
390

that physical training delays or accelerates growth or maturation in
boys and girls (70). Further, the osteogenic benefits of physical
activity, 
specifically 
weight-bearing 
activities 
that 
generate
compressive forces, are essential for skeletal remodeling and growth
(228).
The gold standard for determining biological maturation is skeletal
age assessment. This technique involves trained radiographers
comparing X-rays or radiographs of a child against standard
reference radiographs to determine the extent of ossification of the
bones of the left wrist (93, 201, 217-219). Ossification refers to the
process of laying down new bone material by cells called
osteoblasts. While skeletal age provides the most accurate and
reliable form of assessing maturity, concerns with cost, specialist
equipment, time constraints, and the need for specific radiographic
expertise make the method unrealistic for most practitioners working
with youth. Furthermore, strength and conditioning professionals are
not qualified to determine sexual age as an indicator of maturation,
given the invasive nature of this assessment.
For most practitioners, the most realistic and feasible means of
estimating biological age is from somatic assessments (142).
Somatic age reflects the degree of growth in overall stature or
smaller subdimensions of the body (e.g., limb length). Measures of
growth (e.g., standing height and seated height) are relatively easy
to collect, are noninvasive, and require minimal equipment.
Techniques available to the practitioner include longitudinal growth
curve analysis, percentages and predictions of final adult height
(125), and the prediction of age from peak height velocity (PHV)
(158), which is defined as the age at maximum rate of growth
during the pubertal growth spurt (59) with the mean age, on
average, being around 13.8 years in boys and 11.9 year in girls (10).
While the percentage of predicted adult height (125) and the
maturity offset (158) have both been used to assign youth into
maturity categories, longitudinal data indicate that the percentage of
predicted adult height might be more accurate at predicting
391

observed age at PHV (184); this appears to be a valid alternative for
classifying maturity status when compared to longitudinal growth
curve analysis (166). Using age, height, weight, and mid-parental
height, a child’s eventual adult height can be estimated, and their
current height can then be determined as a percentage of predicted
adult height (125). For example, a 13-year-old boy who is 165
centimeters (5 ft 5 in) tall, 60 kilograms (132 lb) in weight and
whose mother and father are 160 centimeters (5 ft 3 in) and 185
centimeters (6 ft 1 in), respectively, would be estimated at
approximately 90% of their predicted adult height. In some cases, it
may be appropriate to measure somatic growth every three months
(142). More frequent measures could be taken to create a rolling
average and a smoother growth curve; however, this is not always
feasible. For most settings, taking measurements every three
months is likely more practical. This interval should be long enough
to prevent practitioners from misinterpreting small growth changes
caused by measurement inconsistencies. However, as a child nears
their peak height velocity (PHV), it may be wise for practitioners to
measure more frequently, such as monthly. This increased frequency
is due to the rapid growth rate associated with this developmental
stage.
The adolescent growth spurt ensues approximately 88% to 95%
of predicted adult height, and longitudinal data indicate that PHV
occurs at approximately 91% to 92% of predicted adult height
(216). The risk of injury can be elevated in individuals who are
around the time of PHV, and especially those who are also
experiencing high rates of growth during this period (116, 165).
Therefore, in the earlier example of the 13-year-old, his or her
training program might need to be modified (and potentially more
frequent measures of height taken) as the child approaches PHV in
the event of disrupted coordination and control and heightened
injury risk. Alterations in center of mass, muscle imbalances, and the
relative tightening of the muscle–tendon units spanning rapidly
growing bones are potential risk factors for overuse injuries during
392

the pubertal growth spurt (170, 225). Strength and conditioning
professionals may need to adjust training programs (e.g., reinforce
high-quality movement patterns, target flexibility restrictions, correct
muscle imbalances, or decrease the volume or intensity [or both] of
training) during these periods of rapid growth. If a young athlete
complains of pain or discomfort during a growth spurt, the strength
and conditioning professional should also consider the possibility of
an overuse injury rather than labeling these complaints “growing
pains” and, in consultation with the child’s parents or guardians,
should refer the child to a medical practitioner.
Notwithstanding the influence of growth and maturation, training
programs should be tailored to accommodate individual differences
in ability and previous training experience, particularly when
prescribing exercise for children in the weight room. It might be
suitable for an early-maturing, experienced, and technically
competent 13-year-old girl to be exposed to more advanced forms of
training, whereas a late-maturing 16-year-old boy with no training
history and low levels of technical competency may not be ready for
the demands of heavy resistance exercise and require more
introductory training approaches. Therefore, while a given training
program will have an intended adaptation (e.g., strength and power
development), a child’s technical competency (i.e., how well they
move) in addition to their training age (i.e., the length of time the
child has consistently followed a formalized and supervised
resistance training program) and their resistance training skill literacy
(i.e., how children think, connect, and feel about resistance training)
should be key considerations in order to develop appropriate training
programs (61, 137, 142). Strength and conditioning professionals
must recognize all these variables and should individualize training
program design based on each child’s technical competency, training
age, and maturity level. When creating any youth resistance training
program, strength and conditioning professionals should also take
into consideration the unique psychosocial needs of each individual
child and then design, implement, and revise programs according to
393

these needs. For example, a strength and conditioning professional
will typically need to use different interpersonal skills to coach an
inexperienced child with low technical competency and low levels of
self-confidence, versus an experienced and highly competent
adolescent who simply lacks motivation.
Two children of the same chronological age can differ
biologically by up to five years, which underlines the
importance of accounting for maturation in the design
of individualized training programs.
Muscle and Bone Growth
As children grow, muscle mass steadily increases. At birth,
approximately 25% of a child’s body weight is muscle mass, and by
adulthood this percentage increases to about 40% (146). During
puberty, marked increases in hormonal concentrations (e.g.,
testosterone, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor) in
boys result in a discernible increase in muscle mass and widening of
the shoulders, whereas in girls an increase in estrogen production
causes increased body fat deposition, breast development, and
widening of the hips (59). Although muscle mass in girls continues
to increase during adolescence, the increase occurs at a lower rate
than in boys due to differences in their hormonal profiles (146).
Throughout this time, the increase in muscle mass in both sexes is
due to the hypertrophy of individual muscle fibers rather than
hyperplasia (146). Peak muscle mass occurs between the ages of 16
and 20 years in females and between 18 and 25 years in males
unless affected by exercise, diet, or both (146).
394

FIGURE 7.2 Bone formation, which takes place as a result of growth and development.
Most bone formation occurs in the diaphysis (primary
ossification center), which is the central shaft of a long bone, and in
the growth cartilage (secondary ossification center), which is
located at three sites in the child: the epiphyseal (growth) plate, the
joint surface, and the apophyseal insertions of muscle–tendon
units. When the epiphyseal plate becomes completely ossified, the
long bones stop growing (figure 7.2). Although bones typically begin
to fuse during early adolescence, girls generally achieve full bone
maturity about two to three years before boys. The actual age varies
considerably, but most bones are fused by the early 20s.
A particular concern in children is the vulnerability of the growth
cartilage to trauma and overuse (106). Injuries to the growth
cartilage may disrupt the bone’s blood and nutrient supply and result
in permanent growth disturbances (e.g., skeletal undergrowth,
skeletal overgrowth, or malalignment of bone). Trauma from falls or
excessive repetitive stress that may result in a ligament tear in an
adult may produce an epiphyseal plate fracture in a child. Because
the peak incidence of epiphyseal plate fractures in children occurs at
around the time of PHV, it seems that a preadolescent child may be
395

at less risk for an epiphyseal plate fracture than an adolescent child
experiencing the growth spurt (156). It has been suggested that the
epiphyseal plates of younger children may be stronger and more
resistant to shearing-type forces, which may be the cause of injuries
to the growth cartilage (156).
Growth cartilage in children is located at the epiphyseal
plate, the joint surface, and the apophyseal insertions.
Damage to the growth cartilage may impair the growth
and development of the affected bone. However, the
risk of such damage can be reduced with appropriate
exercise technique, sensible progression of training
loads, and suitable instruction by qualified strength and
conditioning professionals.
Developmental Changes in Muscular Strength
As 
muscle 
mass 
increases 
throughout 
preadolescence 
and
adolescence, so does muscular strength. In fact, the growth curves
for strength are similar to those for body mass (59). In boys, peak
gains in strength typically occur about 1.2 years after PHV and 0.8
years after peak weight velocity, with body weight being the clearer
indicator (146). This reflects the adage that children “stretch out
before they fill out”; that is, they experience growth in height before
gaining muscle mass. This pattern also suggests that during periods
of rapid growth, muscle increases first in mass and later in its ability
to express and attenuate high levels of force. This is reflected by
meta-analytical data that show adolescents were able to attain
increases in absolute muscular strength that were nearly 50%
greater than children (15). In girls, peak gains in strength also
typically occur after PHV, although there is more individual variation
in the relationship of strength to height and body weight for girls
than for boys (146). Although the strength of boys and girls is
essentially equal during preadolescence, hormonal differences during
puberty are responsible for acceleration in the strength gains of boys
396

and a general plateau in the natural strength development of girls
during adolescence (139, 146). On average, peak strength is usually
attained by age 20 in untrained women and between the ages of 20
and 30 in untrained men (146).
An important factor related to the expression of muscular strength
in children is the development of the nervous system. If myelination
of nerve fibers (motor neurons) is absent or incomplete, fast
reactions and skilled movements cannot be successfully performed,
and high levels of strength and power are impossible. As the
nervous system continues to develop with age, children improve
their performance in skills that require coordination, balance, agility,
speed, strength, and power. Since the myelination of many motor
neurons is incomplete until sexual maturation, children should not be
expected to respond to training in the same way or to reach the
same skill level as adults until they reach full neural maturity (127).
However, children are well placed for skill development given the
heightened neuroplasticity associated with childhood. This stage of
development involves the process of pruning and strengthening of
the 
synaptic 
pathways 
(88), 
which, 
with 
the 
appropriate
environment and activities, enable children to refine motor control
strategies and enhance skill acquisition. International consensus
proposes that all youth should be exposed to training programs that
provide an opportunity to develop a broad range of fitness
components to build well-rounded youth (17, 137). However, given
that childhood is a time when the corticospinal tissue is plastic, and
that neuromuscular coordination and force production are governed
by neural activation and control, children should primarily focus on
the development of motor skill competency and muscular strength
because these qualities will serve as foundations of athleticism and a
lifetime of moderate to vigorous physical activity (137). Crucially,
coordination and muscular strength should not be viewed as distinct
qualities but as synergistic components of motor skill performance
(30). Therefore, practitioners should seek to train these qualities
397

concomitantly instead of developing them in a hierarchical,
sequential manner.
Because physiological functions are more closely related to
biological age than to chronological age, at any given time an early-
maturing child will likely have an advantage in measures of
athleticism (e.g., absolute strength) if compared against a later-
maturing child of the same sex with less muscle mass. Clearly,
physical differences in body proportions can affect the execution of
resistance exercises. For example, short arms and a large chest
cavity offer a biomechanical advantage in upper body pressing
exercises, whereas conversely, long legs and a long torso are a
disadvantage in squatting movements. These anthropometric factors
have implications for strength and conditioning professionals who
are attempting to standardize fitness tests or develop a resistance
training program for a group of boys and girls who vary greatly in
physical size. It should be noted that whether in a testing or training
environment, the practitioner should use child-size resistance
machines or exercises using body weight, medicine balls, elastic
bands, dumbbells, or barbells. In situations where practitioners are
coaching groups of young athletes, they typically will need to
account for variation in technical competency, maturity status, and
training experience to provide a training session that is individualized
wherever possible. When coaching large groups of children with low
coach-to-athlete ratios, individualizing one or two additional
exercises per session (based on results from simple field-based
testing) might appropriately account for individualization. Similarly,
training sessions that pursue a common goal (i.e., movement skill
development and muscular strength) but adopt differentiating levels
(e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range of motion, movement
speed) can also enable practitioners to individualize training based
on the athletes’ ability.
The reasons for individualized training programs should be
explained to all participants, and special encouragement should be
offered to late maturers who may be smaller and weaker than
398

chronological-age peers with more advanced biological maturity.
Although late maturers tend to eventually catch up to the early
maturers as they proceed through adolescence, young athletes
should realize that many factors, including motivation, coaching, and
innate ability, contribute to success in sport. Importantly, when
coaching youth populations, especially young children (e.g., 5-7
years of age), training environments should attempt to foster task-
oriented views of success (e.g., application of effort, learning
something new) rather than an ego-oriented view (e.g., simply
winning or beating others). While not an exhaustive list, previous
literature has noted that athletic development programs should seek
to cultivate a growth mindset, self-determined motivation, perceived
competence, confidence, and resilience as key psychological
attributes in young athletes (175).
Youth Resistance Training
Clinicians, coaches, and exercise scientists now agree that resistance
exercise is a safe and effective method of conditioning for children
(13, 56, 65, 71, 127, 139, 215). An increasing number of boys and
girls are participating in resistance training activities, and major
sports medicine organizations support children’s participation in a
range of resistance exercise modes, provided that the programs are
appropriately designed and supervised by qualified professionals (21,
56, 139, 215). National standards and grade-level outcomes for
physical education include guidelines and recommendations that
recognize the importance of fitness activities that enhance muscle
and bone strength (52). Perhaps most notably, the World Health
Organization stipulates that children should engage in muscle- and
bone-strengthening activities three times per week as part of their
physical activity recommendations (235).
It is imperative that strength and conditioning professionals
remember that children are not miniature adults. No matter how big
or strong a child is, children are physically, psychologically, and
socially less mature and are often experiencing training activities for
399

the very first time. Children should begin resistance training at a
level that is commensurate with their physical and technical abilities,
maturity level, and individual goals (141). Adult programs and
training philosophies should not be superimposed on younger
populations. In such instances, the intensity and volume of training
are often too severe, and the recovery between training sessions is
inadequate to enable training adaptation to take place. When
introducing children to resistance training activities, it is always
better to underestimate their physical abilities and gradually increase
the volume and intensity of training than to exceed their abilities and
risk injury or long-term negative health outcomes.
Responsiveness to Resistance Training in Children
A plethora of research now shows both children and adolescents can
make meaningful improvements in a wide range of athletic qualities
in response to different modes of resistance training (59, 141). Much
of the early controversy surrounding youth resistance training
stemmed from the issue of children’s trainability (i.e., children’s
responsiveness to the stimulus of resistance exercise) due to early
studies failing to demonstrate a strength increase in preadolescents
who participated in a resistance training program (49). Although the
lack of significant findings in these studies could be explained by
methodological shortcomings, such as short study duration or
inadequate training volume or intensity, the results from these
reports are sometimes cited as proof that resistance training is
ineffective for children. As previously discussed, muscular strength
normally increases from childhood and throughout the teenage
years; thus, a more appropriate conclusion from these reports may
be that training-induced gains from a short-duration, low-volume,
and low-intensity training program are not distinguishable from gains
attributable to normal growth and maturation.
Other investigations have clearly demonstrated that boys and girls
can 
increase 
muscular 
strength 
above 
and 
beyond 
that
accompanying growth and maturation alone, provided that the
400

intensity and volume of training are adequate (48, 63, 135, 138,
197). Children as young as age five have benefited from
developmentally appropriate resistance training (3, 121), and a
variety of training modalities have proven to be effective (139).
While gains in a maximum strength range of approximately 10% to
90% have been reported in the literature (15), strength gains of
roughly 30% to 40% are typically observed in untrained
preadolescent children following short-term (8-20 weeks) resistance
training programs (56, 139). However, following the initial adaptation
period, the rate of change in strength gains will be attenuated as
youth adapt to the training program, thus highlighting the need for
continued, progressive training. Meta-analytical data have shown
that resistance training interventions realize larger gains in muscle
strength and power when programs exceed 23 weeks in duration
(134). Longer-term training programs afford more opportunities for
children to learn and develop skills but also enable children to be
exposed to higher intensities of training in a safe and progressive
manner. Lesinksi and colleagues (134) also indicated that strength
gains were greater when young athletes were exposed to higher
relative intensities (>80% 1RM). Similar notions apply to other
fitness components, with data showing larger gains in jump height in
response to moderate- to high-intensity resistance training (212) and
greater gains in peak oxygen uptake (V̇O2peak) when endurance
training is prescribed at ≥85% HRmax (5). Clearly, training intensity
is a critical prescription variable for strength and conditioning
coaches to manipulate; however, in accordance with the principle of
progressive overload, any increases in intensity should be applied in
a progressive and gradual manner, with periodized fluctuations in
volumes and intensities over time (59).
It is crucial that practitioners ensure that training
intensity is never increased at the expense of technical
competency or a child’s psychosocial maturity. Programs
should always remain designed in accordance with the
401

specific 
needs, 
abilities, 
and 
aspirations 
of 
the
individual.
Children who participate in resistance training programs are likely
to undergo periods of reduced training or inactivity due to program
design factors, extended travel plans, busy schedules, injury,
involvement in multiple sports, or decreased motivation. This
temporary reduction or withdrawal of the training stimulus is called
detraining. In children, unlike adults, the evaluation of strength
changes during the detraining phase is complicated by the growth-
related strength increases during the same period. Nevertheless,
data indicate that training-induced strength gains in children are
impermanent and tend to return to untrained control group values
during the detraining period (55, 69). In one report, participation in
physical education classes and organized sports throughout an eight-
week detraining period did not maintain the preadolescents’ training-
induced strength gains (69). In another study comparing the effects
on children of one and two days per week of resistance training,
participants who resistance trained only once per week averaged
67% of the strength gains of participants who resistance trained
twice per week (63). While increased training frequency is related to
a greater strength training effect in youth (15), this finding must be
considered in light of lifestyle factors (e.g., nutrition and sleep) and
other commitments that youth or young athletes may have (e.g.,
competitive playing schedule, schoolwork, time to interact with
peers). Though the precise mechanisms responsible for the
detraining response remain unclear, it seems likely that changes in
neuromuscular functioning are at least partly responsible. Further,
the detraining effect may not be homogenous, with different
neuromuscular qualities in young children showing different
responses following the cessation of a training program (55, 172).
The potential trainability of children and adolescents is evident
from research studies that have adopted long-term training
intervention periods. For example, a series of studies examined the
402

effects of a two-year strength training program on strength (123),
speed (208), and change-of-direction speed (124) in youth soccer
players in Germany. Using a linear periodized training approach (i.e.,
four weeks of technique block, eight weeks of hypertrophy emphasis
block, and eight weeks of strength emphasis, all of which repeated
twice), young athletes ranging from 11 to 19 years of age were able
to make substantial increases in squat strength (123), which also
translated to improvements in speed (208) and change-of-direction-
speed (124) performance.
Notwithstanding the clear benefits of resistance training,
combined resistance training (i.e., strength training and plyometrics)
has been shown to be more effective than strength training in
isolation (193). Previous research has investigated the effects of 28
weeks of combined resistance training versus combined resistance
training with weightlifting on physical fitness (187) and established
lower limb injury risk factors (188) in adolescent boys. Notably, both
training groups were able to realize improvements in physical fitness
(i.e., strength, power, speed), movement competency (i.e.,
resistance training skills battery quotient), and lower limb jump-
landing mechanics (i.e., tuck jump assessment) irrespective of
program content; however, the percentage improvement in
movement competency was greater when weightlifting progressions
were included in the combined resistance training program.
Interestingly, the first 14 weeks resulted in significant gains in
movement competency and strength, while the second 14 weeks of
training resulted in small to moderate improvements in sprint speed
and indices of power, which reflect the sequence of strength and
movement competency serving as the foundations for gains in power
(12, 99).
The benefit of adopting a long-term approach for the athletic
development of youth can be seen in a study that showed
prepubertal gymnasts were able to make significant improvements in
strength, power, speed, and vaulting performance in response to 10
months of neuromuscular training delivered in addition to standard
403

gymnastics training (160). The study adopted a linear periodized
approach to training with a large proportion of time devoted to
general preparatory training. The gains in athleticism reported
exceeded those of both of a gymnastics-only and a non-gymnastics
control group. Interestingly, this study demonstrated a temporal
response to training, like the findings of Pichardo and colleagues
(187). Significant improvements were observed in different physical
attributes over time. After four months, isometric absolute peak
force and standing broad jump showed notable increases. By seven
months, improvements were seen in countermovement jump height,
modified reactive strength index, and drop jump height. Finally, at
the 10-month mark, enhancements were noted in peak sprint speed,
spring-like behavior, and vaulting vertical takeoff velocity. This study
underscores the benefits of long-term engagement in strength and
conditioning and that some adaptations take time to materialize,
especially in less mature children.
Changes in muscle hypertrophy can significantly contribute to
training-induced strength gains in adolescents and adults, yet it is
unlikely that muscle hypertrophy is primarily responsible for training-
induced strength gains (at least up to 20 weeks) in preadolescents
(179, 197). Although some findings do not agree with this
suggestion, preadolescents appear to experience more difficulty
increasing their muscle mass through a resistance training program
due to inadequate levels of circulating hormones (testosterone,
growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor). In preadolescent boys
and girls, testosterone concentration is between 20 and 60 ng/100
mL; in contrast, during adolescence, testosterone levels in males
increase to about 600 ng/100 mL while the levels in females remain
unchanged (146).
It appears that preadolescents have more potential for an
increase in strength owing to neural factors, such as increases in
motor unit activation and synchronization as well as enhanced motor
unit recruitment and firing frequency (90, 105, 139, 179, 197). It
has also been suggested that intrinsic muscle adaptations,
404

improvements in motor skill performance, and the coordination of
the involved muscle groups could be partly responsible for training-
induced strength gains in preadolescents (197). One cannot state
without qualification, however, that resistance training does not
result in muscle hypertrophy in preadolescents, because it is possible
that longer study durations, higher training volumes, and more
precise measuring techniques (e.g., computerized imaging) may be
needed to uncover potential training-induced muscle hypertrophy in
youth who are following a resistance training program. Researchers
have reported novel data showing that prepubertal female gymnasts
significantly improved muscle thickness (as measured by 2D
ultrasound) in addition to measures of isometric peak force and
stretch-shortening cycle function following exposure to a 10-month
neuromuscular training intervention (161). While muscle thickness is
not a direct measure of muscle size or volume, it has been positively
correlated with muscle anatomical cross-sectional area (77). The
data from Moeskops and colleagues (161) indicate that some change
in muscle architecture might be possible even in prepubertal children
when they are exposed to long-term neuromuscular interventions.
During and after puberty, training-induced gains in strength are
typically associated with gains in muscle hypertrophy and
architecture (85, 195) due to hormonal influences and ongoing
neural adaptations (86). Although lower levels of testosterone in
adolescent females limit the magnitude of training-induced increases
in muscle hypertrophy, other hormone and growth factors (e.g.,
growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor) may be at least
partly responsible for their muscle development. Figure 7.3 highlights
the factors that contribute to the development of muscular strength
—namely, fat-free mass, testosterone concentrations, nervous
system development, and the differentiation of fast-twitch and slow-
twitch muscle fibers.
Preadolescent boys and girls can significantly improve
their strength above and beyond growth and maturation
405

with 
resistance 
training. 
Neurological 
factors, 
as
opposed 
to 
hypertrophic 
factors, 
are 
primarily
responsible for these gains.
In addition to increasing muscular strength, muscular power, and
muscular endurance, regular participation in a youth resistance
training program has the potential to influence many other health-
and fitness-related measures (84, 132, 139). Resistance exercise
may favorably alter selected anatomic structures (128, 223),
psychosocial parameters (25, 147), and academic outcomes (200) in
youth. In addition, ongoing participation in resistance training has
been found to reduce injuries in sport and recreational activities
(186, 224) and improve motor skills and powerful sporting
movements (14, 40, 177).
FIGURE 7.3 Theoretical interactive model for the integration of developmental factors
related to the potential for muscular strength adaptations and performance.
Reprinted by permission from A.D. Faigenbaum, R.S. Lloyd, and G.D. Myer, GD, “Youth Resistance Training: Past
Practices, New Perspectives, and Future Directions,” Pediatric Exercise Science 25, no. 4 (2013): 591-604.
406

From a clinical perspective, it has been reported that muscular
fitness is associated with lower obesity, insulin resistance, and
cardiovascular risk among children and adolescents (43, 84). Of
note, meta-analytical data indicate that resistance training can
reduce body fat in children and adolescents who are overweight or
obese (153). The grades for indicators of youth physical activity
around the world are low, which suggests a widespread crisis of
physical inactivity (6). Children who are obese or those who lead
sedentary lives (e.g., who take a bus to school and watch television
or play computer games after school and on weekends) are not
ready for 1 to 2 hours of sport training four or five days a week.
Current global findings based on a pooled analysis of 3,663
population-representative 
studies 
with 
222 
million 
children,
adolescents, and adults found the burden of obesity has increased
and the age of onset of obesity has decreased in most countries
(39). Specific to the United States, data from 2013 to 2016 show
that 17.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], 16.1%-19.6%) of
American youth aged 2 through 19 years were obese and the
prevalence of severe obesity was 5.8% (95% CI, 4.8%-6.9%) (174),
and the prevalence of many cardiovascular disease risk factors are
projected to increase over the next 30 years (118). Although the
treatment of childhood obesity is complex, it seems that obese youth
enjoy resistance training because it is not aerobically taxing and
provides an opportunity for all participants to experience success
and feel good about their performance.
In addition to the high prevalence of childhood obesity, other
concerning trends in muscular fitness in youth are for those who
engage in organized sports or recreational physical activities (66).
For example, research indicates that within various cohorts of
school-aged children, a range of muscular strength measures (e.g.,
bent-arm hang and handgrip strength) (51, 206, 209) and motor
skill competencies (20, 36, 206) have shown a decrease. Therefore,
while all aspiring young athletes will likely benefit from preparatory
conditioning inclusive of resistance training, it seems that those who
407

might benefit the most are the ones who are less fit to begin with.
This notion underlines the importance of practitioners understanding
and advocating for long-term athletic development as a fundamental
concept for all youth (137).
While resistance training does not affect the genotypic maximum,
it probably has a favorable influence on growth at any stage of
development, as long as appropriate guidelines are followed (70). In
fact, regular participation in an exercise program that includes
resistance training and weight-bearing physical activities has been
shown to enhance bone mineral density in children and adolescents
(50, 221). In support of these observations, it has been reported
that elite adolescent weightlifters who regularly train with heavy
weights while performing multijoint exercises display levels of bone
density well above values of age-matched controls (41, 180). These
findings may be especially important for girls who are at an
increased risk for developing osteoporosis later in life, a clinical
condition characterized by low bone mass and an increased
susceptibility to fractures (231).
Every year, millions of physical activity–related injuries occur
during leisure time and sport participation among children and
adolescents (23, 196), and it has been estimated that more than
50% of overuse injuries sustained by children could be prevented
with simple approaches including coaching education, preparatory
conditioning, delayed specialization, adequate time off from
organized sport, and proper nutrition and sleep (23, 131, 224).
Strength and conditioning professionals can play a pivotal role in
preparing young athletes for sport and thereby minimize or offset
the incidence and severity of sport-related injuries common to young
athletes. In many cases, modern-day youth who enroll in organized
sport programs are unfit and ill-prepared to handle the demands of
their chosen sport. It has also been suggested that regular
participation in a preseason conditioning program that includes
resistance training may increase a young athlete’s resistance to
injury (53, 186, 232). However, given that neuromuscular control in
408

young soccer players has been shown to decline throughout a
competitive season (143) and that injury incidence fluctuates during
different phases of the season (e.g., immediately after returning
from annual holiday periods) (198, 226), it is prudent for youth to
look beyond resistance training as a preseason activity and instead
continue to engage in a modified and periodized resistance training
program throughout the competitive season and during the
postseason and off-season to reduce the risk of subsequent injury.
The goal should be for all children and adolescents to
engage in long-term, periodized athletic development
programs (inclusive of resistance exercise) rather than
short-term programs to enhance physical fitness and
reduce the risk of injury.
Early sport specialization is defined as children engaging in
intensive, year-round (>8 months) training and/or competition in a
single sport, typically beginning during the prepubertal years (131).
Traditional early specialization sports included gymnastics, dance,
and swimming; however, there is a growing trajectory of youth
opting to specialize in other sports at younger ages (21). In many
cases, early sport specialization results in young athletes
accumulating weekly training volumes that exceed recommended
guidelines (21, 202). Even though some coaches argue that early
sport specialization is the key to success, this notion has been
challenged in the literature (21, 114, 131). Notably, meta-analytical
data from 51 studies indicated that while sampling a diverse range
of sports led to more measured initial progress, it was associated
with more sustainable long-term development toward sporting
excellence (96). Research has indicated that youth who participate in
a single sport or specialize in a single position at an early age may
be at a greater risk of serious injury (114, 150, 238) and overuse
injuries (113), developing anterior knee pain (101), possessing less
desirable lower limb jump-landing biomechanics (101), and
409

overtraining and potential burnout (22, 47). Additionally, it seems
that late specialization and involvement in a variety of sports and
activities during the younger years may be better related to sporting
success at a later age (21, 72, 78, 96, 159). Although the total
elimination of youth sport injuries is an unrealistic goal, the addition
of resistance training as part of a long-term athletic development
program may better prepare the young athlete to handle the
duration and magnitude of unanticipated forces that develop in
practice and game situations (65, 106), whether or not they have
specialized. Because of individual differences in growth, maturation,
and stress tolerance, resistance training intensity, volume, and rate
of progression need to be carefully prescribed since this form of
training adds to the chronic repetitive stress placed on the
developing musculoskeletal system. Proper progression and program
variation will optimize gains, prevent boredom, and reduce the stress
that can lead to overtraining. This will be particularly effective when
practitioners use reliable data to help inform decision-making around
program design, and this evidence-informed approach will also work
well with those young athletes who have specialized (163).
Additionally, well-planned recovery strategies (e.g., proper cool-
down, postexercise meal or snack, and adequate sleep) can help to
maximize training adaptations.
Because many sports have a significant strength or power
component, it is attractive to assume that resistance training will
enhance athletic performance. Though comments from parents,
coaches, and children support this contention, scientific reports on
this issue are constrained by the ability to comprehensively define
and quantify “performance.” However, improvements in selected
motor performance skills, such as the long jump, vertical jump, 30-
meter (27 yd) sprint, and agility run, have been observed in children
who participated in a resistance training program of between 8 and
20 weeks (14, 40, 71, 135, 160, 187). Although direct evaluations of
the effects of youth resistance training on sport performance are
often based on proxy measures of performance, a progressive
410

resistance training program will in all likelihood result in some
degree of improvement in sport performance in young athletes (57,
89, 102, 133, 134, 210).
Potential Risks and Concerns
Appropriately prescribed youth resistance training programs are
relatively safe when compared with other sports and activities in
which children and adolescents regularly participate (139, 181).
Paradoxically, it seems that the forces placed on the joints of young
athletes during sport participation may be far greater, and more
difficult to anticipate, than those generated from resistance training
programs (65). The belief that resistance training is dangerous for
children is not consistent with the needs of children and the
documented risks associated with this type of training. Children and
adolescents have been injured in the weight room; however, such
injuries are more likely to be accidental (98, 169) and typically occur
in cases in which the levels of supervision and instruction, technical
competency, and training loads are inappropriate (65). This
highlights the need for strength and conditioning professionals to
heed safety guidelines when working with younger populations.
Although epiphyseal plate fractures have been reported in
adolescents who were resistance training, these reports were case
studies and typically involved the performance of heavy overhead
lifts in unsupervised settings (97, 203, 207). An epiphyseal plate
fracture has not been reported in any prospective youth resistance
training study that adhered to established training guidelines (65).
Of note, 1-repetition maximum (1RM) testing (62, 64, 81) and
maximal isometric assessments in children and adolescents (48, 162,
167) has proven to be safe, provided that appropriate testing
guidelines are followed (i.e., adequate warm-up periods, individual
progression 
of 
loads, 
and 
close 
supervision 
of 
technical
competency). If children and adolescents are taught how to
resistance train properly and understand resistance training
411

guidelines and procedures, the risk of an epiphyseal plate fracture is
minimal.
Dispelling the Myths of Youth Resistance
Training
A wealth of evidence proves children and adolescents can safely and effectively
engage in resistance training to promote improvements in physical fitness, reduce
the risk of sport-related injury, and enhance measures of health and well-being.
However, there still remain certain unfounded myths among some health
professionals that may deter youth from engaging in resistance training (67).
Resistance training stunts bone growth.
False! Resistance training stimulates bone remodeling and strengthens bone,
muscular tissue, and connective tissue during childhood and adolescence.
Resistance training is unsafe for children.
False! With correct technique, appropriate loading, and high-quality instruction,
resistance training is a safe method of training for all youth.
Resistance training is only for young athletes.
False! Resistance training promotes positive physical and psychosocial adaptations
in all youth, regardless of whether they participate in competitive sports.
Children need to wait until puberty to realize the benefits of
resistance training.
False! Research clearly shows that young children can make meaningful gains in
physical fitness following resistance training. Children should be psychologically
mature enough to understand and follow instructions.
Young girls and boys will become “bulky.”
False! Studies have shown that resistance training during childhood stimulates
neuromuscular adaptations. During adolescence, boys will likely increase muscle
mass, but the lower levels of circulating androgens in girls mean they will
experience lower levels of absolute muscle growth.
Program Design Considerations for
Children
It is important to view resistance training as part of a well-rounded
long-term athletic development program for a child that also
addresses other fitness goals (e.g., speed, power, balance,
coordination, endurance). Although there is no minimal age
412

requirement for participation in a youth resistance training program,
children should have the emotional maturity to receive and follow
directions and should want to try this type of activity (139, 215). A
pretraining medical examination is not mandatory for apparently
healthy children; however, all participants should be screened for
any injury or illness that may limit or prevent safe participation in a
resistance training program (215). The goals of youth resistance
training programs should not be limited to increasing muscular
strength but should also include teaching children about their
bodies, promoting an interest in physical activity, teaching weight
room etiquette, and having fun. It seems likely that children who
enjoy participating in physical activities and sport are more likely to
be active later in life (220).
Two important areas of concern in the development of youth
resistance training programs are the quality of instruction and rate of
progression. Strength and conditioning professionals must have a
thorough understanding of youth resistance training guidelines, an
ability and willingness to demonstrate proper exercise technique,
and the requisite pedagogical skills to speak with children at a level
they understand (59, 137, 139). Professionals should deemphasize
competition between participants and focus on proper technique
instead of the amount of weight lifted. Differentiating training
sessions can enable practitioners to meet the needs of individual
children even when delivering sessions to groups of young athletes.
Designing and delivering training programs that pursue a common
goal (i.e., movement skill and muscular strength development) but
have differentiating levels (e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range
of motion, movement speed) can also be a useful approach to allow
for individualization based on the athletes’ ability. While some form
of variation needs to be applied to achieve ongoing adaptation, this
should be applied in a logical and progressive manner, and it is
important to keep the program fresh and challenging. Children
should be given an opportunity to develop proper form and
technique, and there should be a balance between repeated
413

opportunities to practice and master skills versus introducing new
stimuli to keep sessions fun and engaging.
To optimize any training program, practitioners should conduct an
initial assessment of the individual’s characteristics (i.e., physical,
technical, psychosocial) and the demands of the sport or physical
activity in which he or she participates, commonly known as a
needs analysis. With this information collated, practitioners can
then adopt an appropriate assessment battery on relevant measures
of physical performance and injury risk, in addition to estimations of
maturity status. Similarly, consideration should be given to the long-
term aspirations of the child prior to finalizing the training program.
Of course, it should be recognized that the level of sophistication
and rigor of the needs analysis and assessment process is context
specific; completing this preliminary work is far easier for a
practitioner working one on one with a small number of children in a
private facility compared to another teacher or coach working in a
high school setting that is responsible for the programming of
hundreds of school-aged children. Regardless of the situation, it is
important to have some understanding of the current training status
of the child to know how to construct the program.
Although only limited data are available regarding the relationship
between repetitions and selected percentages of the 1RM in
children, it appears that the number of repetitions that can be
performed at a given percentage of the 1RM is specific to the given
exercise (68). Thus, the minimal strength threshold, when expressed
as a percentage of 1RM, may vary between muscle groups, possibly
due to the amount of muscle mass involved with each exercise.
While practitioners have safely used 1RM (62) and isometric mid-
thigh pull testing (160) to determine strength levels in youth within
research settings and sport environments, where this is not possible
(perhaps owing to time limitations, class size, lack of equipment or
coach expertise), alternative means of assessing strength could be
used. Strength and conditioning professionals can use predictive
equations that estimate 1RM loads from multiple submaximal
414

repetitions (e.g., 5RM or 10RM) (139). However, strength and
conditioning professionals should recognize that such approaches
might place the child at heightened risk of injury due to the
cumulative fatiguing effects of multiple repetitions on technical form.
In order to obtain a surrogate measure of muscular strength without
the use of repetition maximum schemes, practitioners could use
field-based measures of different jump protocols (e.g., vertical jump
or long jump) or handgrip strength, measures that have been
significantly correlated to 1RM values in youth (29, 157). Irrespective
of the strength testing protocol used, the child or adolescent must
be able to demonstrate and maintain correct technical competency
throughout the entire test under the watchful eye of a qualified
professional.
Advanced multijoint exercises such as the snatch and clean and
jerk can be incorporated into a child’s program at the appropriate
time (i.e., after foundational strength and technique progressions
have been completed), but the primary focus, especially early in a
resistance training program, should be on developing motor skill
competency and muscle strength (168, 194). The athletic motor
skill competencies (AMSC) have been proposed to represent the
foundational movements that underpin all athletic movements
(figure 7.4; 194). To develop well-rounded athleticism in youth,
practitioners are encouraged to design programs that increase both
form (i.e., technical competency) and function (i.e., force-producing
capabilities) in each of the AMSC. Practitioners do not necessarily
need to expose youth to all of the AMSC in each session, but they
should be targeted at various points throughout the training program
(194).
Poor technique can put abnormal stress on musculoskeletal
tissues and lead to injury. The resistance must be lowered if proper
exercise technique cannot be maintained. When learning new
exercises, children should start with an unloaded barbell, a long
wooden stick, or PVC piping to learn the correct technique. The
importance of correct feedback, delivered at the correct time and in
415

the correct manner, cannot be overestimated during this stage of
development to ensure the facilitation of skill development. Youth
training should involve ongoing grading and evaluation of the
technical performance of different exercises by a trained observer
(periodically from formal assessment but consistently during sessions
via 
coach 
observations), 
as 
opposed 
to 
simply 
assessing
performance measures (e.g., load lifted or the velocity of movement)
(60). Such an approach can be used to continually educate young
athletes about proper exercise technique, raise awareness about
common technical flaws, and provide coaches and teachers with a
tool for assessing learning during practice or physical education. A
summary of youth resistance training guidelines is presented in the
sidebar.
FIGURE 7.4 The spectrum of athletic motor skill competencies (AMSC).
Reprinted by permission from J.M. Radnor, S. Moeskops, S.L Morris, et al., “Developing Athletic Motor Skill
Competencies in Youth,” Strength Conditioning Journal 42, no. 6 (2020): 54-70.
416

Youth Resistance Training Guidelines
Each child should understand the benefits and risks associated with
resistance training.
Competent and caring strength and conditioning professionals should design
and supervise training sessions based primarily on the desired training
adaptation and technical competency but also with consideration to growth
and maturation.
The exercise environment should be safe and free of hazards, and the
equipment should be appropriately sized to fit each child.
Dynamic warm-up exercises, movement challenges, and opportunities for
exploratory play should be performed before resistance training.
When appropriate, static stretching exercises should be performed after
resistance training.
Carefully monitor each child’s tolerance to the exercise stress.
Begin with light loads to allow appropriate adjustments to be made.
Increase the resistance gradually (e.g., 5%-10%) as technique and strength
improve.
Depending on individual needs and goals, different set × repetition
combinations (e.g., 3 × 5) can be performed on a variety of single- and
multijoint exercises (and those targeting the strengthening of the core
musculature).
Advanced multijoint exercises, such as the snatch and clean and jerk, may be
incorporated into the program, provided that appropriate loads are used and
technical proficiency remains a key outcome.
Two or three nonconsecutive training sessions per week are recommended;
however, youth with higher training ages may participate in more frequent
resistance training sessions per week.
When necessary, adult spotters should be nearby to actively assist the child in
the event of a failed repetition (e.g., bench press or squat).
The resistance training program should be systematically periodized
throughout the year to ensure that the child or adolescent is exposed to a
sequential and varied training stimulus with adequate rest and recovery
between training cycles.
Adapted from Faigenbaum et al. (2009) and Lloyd et al. (2014)
417

Older Adults
The number of men and women over the age of 65 continues to
rise, and more opportunities for participation in sports ranging from
marathon running to weightlifting are available to older athletes.
While the cardiovascular endurance and muscular strength of older
competitors or masters athletes are truly exceptional, even the most
highly trained athletes experience some decline in performance after
age 30 (83, 107). For example, competitive weightlifting ability has
been shown to decline with age at a rate of approximately 1% to
1.5% per year until approximately age 70, after which a more
dramatic decrease occurs (152). Older individuals who do not
engage in physical activity typically see greater decrements in
several physical performance measures and increase their risk of
debilitating injury (95, 182). Strength and conditioning professionals
should understand the physiological changes that occur with aging
and the associated trainability of older individuals. In addition, the
potential health risks associated with physical activity for older
individuals need to be considered.
Age-Related Changes in Musculoskeletal
Health
Significant changes in body composition with advancing age can lead
to the development of physical functional impairments and injury.
The well-documented loss of bone and muscle with age not only
makes activities of daily life such as getting out of a chair and
opening a window more difficult but also increases the risk for falls,
fractures, and long-term disability (37, 95). Bones become fragile
with age because of a decrease in bone mineral content that causes
an increase in bone porosity. The bone mineral content and
microarchitecture of bone can deteriorate to such an extent that the
risk of bone fracture, particularly of the hip, spine, or wrist during a
fall, is increased (2, 76). Osteopenia is defined by a bone mineral
418

density between −1 and −2.5 standard deviations (SD) of the young
adult mean, whereas osteoporosis is defined by a bone mineral
density below −2.5 SD of the young adult mean (119). These
conditions, which result in bones with less density and strength, are
serious concerns for older people (particularly women) because they
heighten the risk of skeletal fracture and poor bone health (2). The
slow but progressive loss of bone with age has been linked to
physical inactivity and to hormonal, nutritional, mechanical, and
genetic factors (7, 11). Figure 7.5 shows the structural difference
between normal, healthy bone and bone at the stage of
osteoporosis.
FIGURE 7.5 Structural differences between (a) normal, healthy bone, and bone at the
stage of (b) osteoporosis.
© Paul Gunning / Science Source
Advancing age is also associated with a loss of muscle mass,
strength, and function (19, 38). The term sarcopenia refers to a
progressive and generalized skeletal muscle disorder that is
associated with an increased likelihood of adverse outcomes
including falls, fractures, physical disability, and mortality (42).
Computed tomography has revealed that after age 30 there is a
decrease in the cross-sectional areas of individual muscles, along
with a decrease in muscle density, reductions in tendon compliance,
419

and an increase in intramuscular fat (2, 110). These changes seem
to be a predictable consequence of advancing age and seem to be
most pronounced in women (110). The observed muscle atrophy
with aging appears to result from physical inactivity and a gradual
and selective denervation of type II muscle fibers (136, 192, 237).
Decreased muscle mass results in a loss of muscle strength. In one
report, 40% of women aged 55 to 64 years, 45% of women aged 65
to 74 years, and 65% of women aged 75 to 84 years were unable to
lift about 10 pounds (4.5 kg) (115). The reduction in the size and
number and the gradual denervation of muscle fibers (100, 192) and
the age-related changes in motor unit morphology and properties
(108, 204) also lead to a decrease in the ability of a muscle to
generate power (i.e., exert force rapidly); in fact, power recedes at a
faster rate than muscle strength with aging (79). Since everyday
activities require a certain degree of power production, a decrease in
the ability of muscles to produce force rapidly may adversely affect
the ability of older adults to safely perform activities such as stair
climbing and walking. Factors that may contribute to the age-related
decline in muscle strength and power include reductions in muscle
mass, nervous system changes, hormonal changes, poor nutrition,
and physical inactivity (16, 112). The functional consequences of
these age-related changes are significant because the magnitude
and rate of change influence the age at which a person may become
functionally dependent (e.g., unable to perform household tasks or
rise from a chair) or reach a threshold of disability. A summary of
adaptations to aging and resistance training is presented in table
7.1.
TABLE 7.1 Summary of the Effects of Aging and
Resistance Training
Physical or physiological variable
Effect of aging
Effect of resistance training
Muscular strength
Decreases
Increases
Muscular power
Decreases
Increases
420

Physical or physiological variable
Effect of aging
Effect of resistance training
Muscular endurance
Decreases
Increases
Muscle mass
Decreases
Increases
Muscle fiber size
Decreases
Increases
Muscular metabolic capacity
Decreases
Increases
Resting metabolic rate
Decreases
Increases
Body fat
Increases
Decreases
Bone mineral density
Decreases
Increases
Physical function
Decreases
Increases
Advancing age is associated with a loss of muscle
power, muscle strength, and muscle mass, which is
largely attributable to physical inactivity. A direct result
of these losses is a decrease in functional independence
and an increased risk of falls and fractures.
Age-Related Changes in Neuromuscular
Function
Seniors are at an increased risk of falling, which can lead to serious
health, psychosocial, and economic consequences that negatively
affect overall quality of life. Specifically, falls can result in pain
syndromes, joint dislocations, skeletal fractures, limitations on daily
functional activities, and a reduction in self-confidence (95, 211).
Falls can also lead to permanent disability, institutionalization, and
fatalities (46). Intrinsic factors that lead to increased risk of falls in
seniors include decrements in muscle strength and power (190),
reaction time (2), and impaired balance and postural stability (205).
Muscle activity before (preactivation) and immediately following
(cocontraction) contact with the ground is an important mediator
of braking and dynamic stabilization in both young and old
individuals. Increased preactivation helps increase stiffness of the
421

limb using fast stretch reflexes to better prepare the limb for ground
contact. Cocontraction is a motor control strategy that dynamically
stabilizes the joint; however, due to the simultaneous activation of
both the agonist and antagonist muscle groups crossing the same
joint, net joint moments and agonistic force outputs are reduced
(236). Research shows that seniors rely on increased levels of
muscle cocontraction as a compensatory mechanism to offset their
increased balance difficulties and to minimize postural sway (171).
Research also highlights that reduced mechanical power output
when walking (especially during the push-off phase) of is one of the
biomechanical aging features of gait (45). Intuitively, this literature
would suggest that older adults should use a variety of training
modes specifically designed to offset these natural reductions in
neuromuscular function. Such methods include low-intensity
plyometrics, strength training, balance and dynamic stabilization
exercises, and proprioception training to develop the ability to react
more efficiently with the ground (92, 95, 189).
Physical activity interventions can be effective in improving
neuromuscular function and preventing falls in seniors (95, 112,
222). However, simply increasing physical activity will not prevent
falls on its own. Rather, seniors must engage with, and adhere to,
multidimensional, periodized programs that incorporate elements of
both resistance and balance training (76, 112, 222). Furthermore,
current guidelines suggest that as with any population, training
programs for seniors should overload progressively to promote a
challenging training environment, and that training should be
completed on a frequent basis to provide individuals with a sufficient
training dosage (76). Of note, resistance training as a stand-alone
training method does not seem to prevent the risk of falls (211), and
balance and flexibility training must accompany resistance training in
order to provide the requisite training stimulus to reduce fall risk.
Aerobic exercise should also be featured in a well-balanced
exercise program for older adults, because data indicate that
concurrent strength and aerobic endurance training can be delivered
422

together to improve multiple measures of physical fitness (8).
Notably, maximal aerobic power decreases with age in adults as a
consequence of various physiological changes that accompany
aging; for example, muscle mass and strength decreased (130) and
fat mass increases (129), with men showing a more rapid decline
than women (233). On average, when women and men are matched
by age, the aerobic power values of women range from 73% to 85%
of the values of men (229); however, the general physiological
response to training in later life is equivocal between men and
women (4, 183). The differences in aerobic power may be caused by
several factors, including women’s higher percentage of body fat and
lower blood hemoglobin values and men’s larger heart size and
blood volume (24, 34). Notwithstanding the importance of a varied
training program, the relative importance and potency of resistance
training in increasing muscular strength, muscular power, and bone
mineral density, while counteracting the age-related declines in
contractile function and muscle atrophy, in addition to its many other
health benefits for seniors, cannot be overlooked (76).
Resistance Training for Older Adults
Aging does not appear to enhance or reduce the ability of the
musculoskeletal system to adapt to resistance exercise, and as a
training mode, resistance training can be an efficacious tool against
the 
declines 
associated 
with 
sarcopenia 
(28). 
Significant
improvements in muscular strength, muscular power, muscle mass,
bone mineral density, and functional capabilities (e.g., gait speed)
have been observed in older people who participated in progressive
resistance training programs (76, 112, 145). For older adults, such
improvements enhance exercise performance, decrease the risk for
injury, promote independent living, and improve quality of life.
Because of the age-related changes in musculoskeletal health,
resistance exercise is a beneficial mode of training for older
populations who need to enhance musculoskeletal strength and
power and resist decrements in muscle mass, bone mineral density,
423

and functional abilities. Resistance training can also improve mobility
and enhance physical functioning that enable seniors to perform
activities of daily living (ADL) and preserve independence (76).
Furthermore, data also show that muscular strength is an important
factor for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease, type 2
diabetes, cancer mortality, and all-cause mortality (87, 164).
Resistance training provides a highly effective means of
attenuating 
physiological 
changes 
associated 
with
aging, improving physical function, and decreasing the
risk of chronic health conditions.
Responsiveness to Resistance Training in Older
Adults
A great deal of attention has focused on strategies to improve the
musculoskeletal health of older men and women. Because of the
deconditioned state of many seniors, desirable changes in muscle
strength and function can result from a variety of resistance training
protocols, particularly during the first few weeks of training (82).
Previously sedentary older men have more than doubled knee
extensor strength and tripled knee flexor strength following a 12-
week resistance training program (80), and similar observations have
been made in older women after 12 weeks of resistance training
(33). In a seminal study, the ability of very old men and women (87-
96 years old) to improve muscular strength was demonstrated
following only eight weeks of resistance training (73). Meta-
analytical data has indicated that in a sample of more than 800
seniors aged 75 to 97 years of age, resistance training significantly
increased measures of muscle strength and increases in whole-
muscle hypertrophy (94). Meta-analytical data also show that while
sex differences may exist in resistance training adaptations in seniors
when data are considered on an absolute basis with males making
larger gains than females, these sex differences are removed, or in
some measures reversed, when data are interpreted on a relative
424

scale (117). Collectively, resistance training appears to be an
effective means to mitigate age-related dynapenia (76).
Improvements in gait speed, stair-climbing ability, balance, and
overall spontaneous activity have also been associated with training-
induced strength gains in older populations (145). Declines in muscle
power are associated with disability and the ability to perform ADL,
particularly in females (112), and the need to minimize age-related
deficits in muscle power is an important part of exercise prescription
for seniors (76, 112). Evidence indicates that resistance training
specific to power development may help optimize functional abilities
in older adults (2, 92, 178) and that power training may be as
effective as traditional resistance training in developing muscle
architecture and neuromuscular activation properties of the lower
limb (230). In some instances, it has been suggested that high-
velocity power training has a greater influence on the ability to
produce explosive force than traditional progressive resistance
training (92, 191). For example, Fielding and colleagues (74) showed
that older adults who completed high-velocity resistance training
made greater gains in peak power and similar gains in maximum
strength compared to seniors who trained at slower velocities over a
16-week training period. Similar results were reported by Reid and
colleagues (199); in that study, older adults who completed a high-
velocity, high-power resistance training program made significantly
greater gains in leg press peak power than individuals who followed
a slow-velocity, progressive resistance training program. While the
optimal training protocol for improving muscular strength and power
in seniors is not known, it appears a dose–response relationship
exists between training intensity and improvements in muscular
strength and power (44), with higher-intensity resistance training
being more effective in developing maximal muscle strength than
moderate- or low-intensity training (9, 214).
Regular participation in a resistance training program also seems
to have profound anabolic effects in older populations (33, 73, 80).
Computed tomography and muscle biopsy analysis showed evidence
425

of muscle hypertrophy in older men who participated in a high-
intensity resistance training program (80), and other investigations
involving older adults have shown that resistance training can
improve nitrogen retention, which can have a positive effect on
muscle protein metabolism (27, 239). Meta-analytical data have
indicated that resistance training is also an effective treatment to
improve body fat mass and for muscle strength and performance in
seniors diagnosed with sarcopenia (35). Resistance training has also
been shown to have an important effect on energy balance in older
adults, as evidenced by an increase in the resting metabolic rate of
men and women who resistance train (26). It is noteworthy that
dietary modifications (a change in total food intake or selected
nutrients) in addition to resistance training promotes a greater
hypertrophic response than resistance training alone in older men
(154).
Although the response of bone to resistance exercise is influenced
by a complex interaction of many variables (e.g., hormonal status,
activity history, and nutrition), it has been reported that resistance
exercise has a positive effect on bone health in older men and
women (103, 173). Regularly performed resistance training can
offset the age-related declines in bone health by maintaining or
increasing bone mineral density (BMD). Notably, meta-analytical
data on 1,130 participants (mean age ~70 yrs) indicate that
progressive resistance training programs stimulated significant
increases in muscle strength and BMD of the femur/hip, with
adaptations in both strength and BMD favoring lower volumes and
higher external loads (173). Furthermore, a systematic review of 25
studies indicated that while ≥2 sessions per week of high-velocity
resistance 
training 
can 
significantly 
increase 
BMD, 
skeletal
adaptations can be lost when resistance training is stopped for >6
months (103). Researchers have also documented that some
strength, power, and fiber type adaptations in older men are only
partially preserved after just 12 weeks of detraining; however,
strength gains can be recovered following a period of retraining (18).
426

Collectively, 
these 
studies 
show 
the 
transient 
nature 
of
neuromuscular adaptations and underline the importance of viewing
resistance training as a lifelong commitment. Resistance training
may also reduce the risk of osteoporotic fractures by improving
dynamic balance, muscle mass, and overall level of physical activity
(2). While resistance exercise undoubtedly can improve bone health
in older adults, the interaction of exercise with hormonal and
nutritional factors influences the degree of benefit of the exercise
program. Furthermore, bones retain the beneficial effects of exercise
only as long as training is continued. During periods of inactivity,
bone density tends to revert to preexercise levels (111).
Older 
men 
and 
women 
can 
make 
significant
improvements 
in 
strength, 
power, 
mobility, 
and
functional 
ability 
in 
response 
to 
periodized 
and
progressive resistance training. Aerobic, resistance, and
balance exercise are all beneficial for older adults, but
only resistance training can increase muscular strength,
muscular power, and muscle mass.
Program Design Considerations for Older Adults
Resistance training is currently recognized as an important
component of a well-rounded fitness program for older adults (2, 76,
112). Because age-related losses of musculoskeletal strength, power,
and mass may be almost universal, programs designed to maintain
or improve musculoskeletal health in older adults should be
implemented. Not only can regular participation in a resistance
training program offset some of these age-related losses, but it can
help older people maintain a more active, higher-quality lifestyle and
promote psychological and cognitive well-being (76, 112).
The fundamental principles of designing a resistance training
program for an older person and a younger person are basically the
same, but strength and conditioning professionals need to consider
several concerns when working with seniors. Attention should be
427

given to preexisting medical ailments, prior training history, and
nutritional status before the beginning of a resistance training
program that may predispose seniors to increased risk of exercise-
induced injury or illness. Even though older populations retain the
capacity to adapt to increased levels of physical activity, safe and
effective exercise guidelines must be followed.
Before participation in an exercise program, seniors should
complete a medical history and risk factor questionnaire (76).
Potential limitations and possible restrictions for physical activity can
be ascertained from this information. In some cases, physician
clearance is required before the initiation of a moderate or vigorous
exercise program (76)—for example, in cardiac rehabilitation
patients or cancer survivors. Any questions regarding a participant’s
medical 
status 
(e.g., 
heart 
disease, 
hypertension, 
arthritis,
osteoporosis, or diabetes mellitus) should be answered by a health
professional. After this information has been obtained, a preprogram
evaluation to document baseline measurements and assess
responses to specific exercise modalities should be performed.
Although a treadmill exercise test is often used to evaluate
cardiovascular responses to aerobic exercise, a strength test
(preferably on the equipment used in training) should be performed
to assess responses to resistance exercise and aid in the exercise
prescription. Of note, while resistance machines may be used in the
early stages of a training program with older adults due to balance
and flexibility limitations, where appropriate, older adults should
sensibly incorporate free weight, multijoint resistance training
exercises into the program to provide a greater overall training
stimulus and place a greater demand on postural stability. Various
methods of assessing muscular strength, including repetition
maximum testing, can be reliably used in senior populations,
provided that appropriate testing guidelines are followed (76).
Strength and conditioning professionals should be aware of the
potential risks of breath holding (Valsalva maneuver) for older adults
(76). While the Valsalva maneuver assists in stabilizing the trunk and
428

vertebral column during performance of various resistance training
exercises, owing to the sudden rise in systolic and diastolic blood
pressure that the technique creates, this technique is generally
discouraged in seniors (1, 149), especially in those individuals with
absolute and relative contraindications (e.g., those with coronary
heart 
disease, 
uncontrolled 
hypertension, 
musculoskeletal
limitations, and pacemakers or defibrillators) (76).
Evidence suggests that resistance training can be safe for seniors
when individuals adhere to appropriate training guidelines (2, 76,
112). On the other hand, poorly designed programs can be
potentially hazardous. For example, failing to provide sufficient rest
periods between sets and between different exercises, programming
exercises that are technically too challenging, or increasing the
intensity of exercise (typically the external load against which the
individual is working) all increase the likelihood of resistance
training–related injury. Like the situation with youth populations, the
resistance training stimulus should not be increased at the expense
of technical competency for older adults.
Untrained seniors who begin resistance training should start at a
relatively low exercise intensity and volume, and the exercise
prescription should be individualized (76). Notably, meta-analytical
data have indicated that while single sets provided adequate
stimulus for adaptations in upper body strength, multiple sets
produced greater improvements in lower-limb muscle strength and
muscle quality in older adults (148). Although higher intensities and
volumes can be tolerated by some older men and women who have
resistance training experience, the early phase of the training
program should be directed toward emphasizing the benefits of
resistance training, addressing individual needs, building confidence,
and learning proper exercise technique while minimizing the
potential for muscle soreness and injury. Less intense training during
the first few weeks of an exercise program may also be beneficial for
seniors who are apprehensive about participating in a resistance
training program. Following the initial adaptation period, the training
429

program can gradually progress if it continues to meet the needs
and medical concerns of each person. In training older men and
women, it is particularly important to focus on the interaction of
major muscle groups used in everyday activities, such as load
carrying and climbing stairs.
During the early stages of a resistance training program
for older adults, investing in education, reducing
anxieties, and building confidence are key outcomes to
promote long-term engagement.
Once participants master the performance of basic resistance
exercises, more advanced and demanding exercises such as standing
postures with free weights (barbells and dumbbells), multidirectional
medicine ball exercises, and advanced balance training (e.g., single-
leg stands and circle turns) can be incorporated into the program.
Seniors should gradually progress from 1 set of 8 to 12 repetitions at
a relatively low intensity (e.g., 40%-50% 1RM) to higher training
volumes and intensities (e.g., 3 sets per exercise with 60%-80% of
1RM), depending on individual needs, goals, and abilities (76, 82).
The current consensus indicates that for each of the primary muscle
groups, older adults should progress toward 2 or 3 sets of 6 to 12
repetitions of one or two multijoint exercises, working at 70% to
85% of the 1RM, two or three times per week (76). In addition,
high-velocity power exercises can be gradually incorporated into the
overall training regimen if seniors have successfully completed a
general resistance training program. Current recommendations for
increasing power in healthy older adults include the performance of
1 to 3 sets per exercise with a light to moderate load (40%-60%
1RM) in concentric movements for 6 to 10 repetitions with high
repetition velocity (76). However, plyometrics can also serve as an
effective means to develop high rate-of-force development in various
expressions of the stretch-shortening cycle in older adults when
properly programmed in supervised settings (227).
430

Dispelling the Fears of Resistance Training
for Older Adults
Despite the publicized benefits of resistance exercise for older adults,
misperceptions remain about the notion of lifting weights. Literature has noted the
phenomenon of a “fear of resistance exercise,” which can lead to older adults
demonstrating avoidance behavior to resistance exercise due to apprehension,
anxiety, or a lack of confidence (4). Similarly, a lack of awareness or understanding
can be a barrier to older adults participating in resistance exercise, which
underlines the importance of correct education and the promotion of individualized
approaches (31, 109). To dispel the fears of resistance training, certain key
messages should be promoted to older populations:
Resistance training can cause injury to the musculoskeletal system
in older adults.
False! When programs are technique focused, individualized, and designed and
delivered by appropriately qualified professionals, resistance training is a safe and
effective mode of training for older adults and can promote positive adaptations in
both muscle and bone (76).
Resistance training is not safe for older adults with cardiovascular
or musculoskeletal contraindications.
False! Resistance training can easily be modified to accommodate for such
contraindications. Initially training at lower volumes and intensities, avoiding the
Valsalva maneuver, reducing ranges of motion, and simplifying exercise variants
are some of the ways in which prescription can account for contraindications and
help develop confidence in older adults (76).
Resistance training takes too much time.
False! Improvement in muscle strength and function can be achieved from
exposures to a minimal dose program (e.g., ≤60 mins/session, 2 days/week) (75).
Exercise “snacking,” defined as multiple short bouts (e.g., <10 mins) of muscle
strengthening exercise, has also been shown to promote adaptations in basic
function in older adults (185, 234).
Resistance training requires access to a fitness center.
False! Improvements in both health- and skill-related components of fitness have
been realized by older adults following exposure to home-based resistance
exercise. Notably, supervised training is preferable; however, home-based muscle
strengthening activities can provide some form of meaningful adaptation (32).
Resistance training will make older adults too muscular.
False! Appropriately prescribed resistance training can stimulate gains in muscle
strength without significantly adding muscle bulk. Maintaining or increasing muscle
431

mass, strength, and power are important for performing ADLs and physical
independence.
A resistance training program for older men and women should
vary in volume and intensity throughout the year to lessen the
likelihood of overtraining and ensure that progress is made
throughout the training period. Because recovery from a training
session may take longer in older populations, a training frequency of
two or three sessions per week is recommended, at least during the
initial adaptation period (76, 112). Strength and conditioning
professionals should be sensitive to the concerns of individuals and
be able to modify a training program based on the person’s health
history and individual goals. With competent instruction and support
from friends, older men and women can gain confidence in their
ability to resistance train, which may be enough to ensure good
adherence to the program. However, since a majority of older adults
do not currently engage in resistance training activities (54, 122,
213), professionals may initially need to increase awareness of the
fitness benefits associated with resistance exercise, address the
concerns that seniors may have about participating in a resistance
training program, and adapt the exercises and intensity to the needs
of the participants.
Safety Recommendations for Resistance
Training for Older Adults
Older adult participants should be prescreened, since many older people
suffer from a variety of age-related medical conditions. If necessary, medical
advice should be sought concerning the most appropriate type of activity.
Participants should warm up for 5 to 10 minutes before each exercise
session. An acceptable warm-up includes low- to moderate-intensity aerobic
activity and calisthenics.
Older adults should perform static stretching exercises either before or after
—or both before and after—each resistance training session.
432

Older adults should use a resistance intensity that does not excessively
overload the musculoskeletal system.
Participants should avoid performing the Valsalva maneuver during resistance
training to avoid an abnormal increase in blood pressure.
Older adults should be allowed 48 to 72 hours of recovery between exercise
sessions.
They should perform all exercises within a range of motion that is pain free.
As with any individual engaging with resistance training, older adults should
receive individualized exercise instruction from qualified instructors.
Researchers have reported that social support, access to
qualified fitness professionals, improving the ability to
complete daily activities, and decreasing the fear and
likelihood of falls are some of the motivators for older
adults consistently engaging in resistance and balance
exercise.
An additional consideration related to resistance training in older
men and women is appropriate nutrition. The quality and quantity of
a person’s food intake (or perhaps selected nutrients) may mean the
difference between losing and gaining muscle mass. It seems that
adequate amounts of protein are essential for muscle hypertrophy in
older people (126, 151). Furthermore, inadequate intakes of
macronutrients (fat, protein, and carbohydrate) and micronutrients
(vitamins and minerals) are associated with potential negative health
consequences, including fatigue, compromised immune function, and
delayed recovery from injury. Improving an older person’s food
intake not only improves health but may also optimize adaptations to
resistance training.
433

Conclusion
Based upon the available research, resistance training can be a safe
and effective method of conditioning for males and females of all
ages and abilities. The potential benefits are multifactorial, including
positive effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), health markers (e.g., body composition and
cardiac function), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image,
confidence, well-being). Moreover, regular participation in a
resistance training program can reduce the risk of sport- and
physical activity–related injuries in athletes and nonathletes of all
ages and abilities and promote independent living in seniors. Though
the fundamental principles of resistance training are similar for
people of all ages, there are unique concerns specific to youth and
senior populations. Knowledge of age- and maturity-related
differences is essential to the development and evaluation of safe
and effective resistance training programs. Strength and conditioning
professionals should be aware that individual responses to resistance
exercise may vary greatly and should be sensitive to the individual
needs of all participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of age- and maturity-
related differences and their implications for resistance exercise.
Collectively, this work has shown the beneficial effects of resistance
training on individuals of all ages and has provided the foundation
for recommendations about the design of strength and conditioning
programs. The information in this chapter and other chapters should
help strength and conditioning professionals understand and
appreciate age- and maturity-related differences and enhance their
ability to develop safe and effective resistance training programs for
children, adolescents, and older adults alike.
KEY TERMS
434

activities of daily living (ADL)
adolescence
adulthood
apophyseal
athleticism
athletic motor skill competencies (AMSC)
biological maturation
bone mineral density
childhood
chronological age
cocontraction
development
diaphysis
dynapenia
epiphyseal plate
growth
growth cartilage
long-term athletic development
maturation
needs analysis
older
osteopenia
osteoporosis
peak height velocity (PHV)
preactivation
puberty
resistance exercise
sarcopenia
senior
technical competency
training age
young athlete
youth
435

STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  In reference to biological maturation, the acronym PHV stands
for which of the following?
  a.  pediatric height value
  b.  peak height velocity
  c.  partial height value
  d.  peak height value
  2.  During the developmental years, the primary ossification
center where most bone formation occurs is referred to as
which of the following?
  a.  diaphysis
  b.  growth plate
  c.  head of the bone
  d.  uniphysis
  3.  Improvements in muscle strength and power during childhood
are predominantly due to adaptations in which system of the
body?
  a.  skeletal system
  b.  circulatory system
  c.  neuromuscular system
  d.  immune system
4. Which of the following is the progressive and generalized
skeletal muscle disorder that is associated with an increased
likelihood of adverse outcomes including falls, fractures,
physical disability, and mortality in older adults?
a. hyperplasia
b. hypertrophy
c. neuropathy
d. sarcopenia
5. What condition is deemed to be present when an individual’s
bone mineral density is 2.5 standard deviations (SD) or more
below the average of the young adult mean?
436

a. osteoclast
b. osteopenia
c. osteoporosis
d. osteoblast
437
