CHAPTER 8
SEX-RELATED DIFFERENCES
AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS
FOR RESISTANCE TRAINING
N. Travis Triplett, PhD, and Nicole Dabbs, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss sex-related differences in physical characteristics and
muscular function and the implications for resistance training in
females;
recognize common injuries and conditions in females;
discuss responses and adaptations to resistance training in
females; and
understand resistance training recommendations for females.
Strength and conditioning professionals need to understand sex-
related differences in physical characteristics, body composition, and
physiological responses to resistance exercise when designing and
evaluating 
resistance 
training 
programs 
for 
females. 
An
understanding of these differences and the areas of concern that are
unique to female athletes can help to optimize performance and
decrease the risk of sport-related injuries.
438

Implications of Resistance Training for
Females
Females who regularly participate in resistance training activities can
improve their health, reduce their risk of degenerative diseases (e.g.,
osteoporosis) and their injury rates, and enhance their overall
sporting performance. Whereas in the past females may have
questioned the value of resistance training or even avoided this type
of exercise due to social stigma, evidence clearly indicates that
females are capable of tolerating and adapting to the stresses of
resistance exercise and that the benefits are substantial (93).
Furthermore, to enhance health and fitness and reduce injury rates,
it is now suggested that resistance training be an essential
component of any exercise or training program that females follow
(127, 128, 167).
Physical Changes in Early Adulthood
While differences in growth and development between boys and girls
are covered in chapter 7, a few physical developmental changes
continue into early adulthood. On average, females mature earlier
than males (105), and most measures of female growth and
maturation are complete by around age 18. Some exceptions include
the growth plates, which typically close by the age of 20, and peak
bone density (around age 30) (105). However, neither of these are
undeveloped enough to result in a higher risk of injury from training,
including activities such as high-intensity or high-load plyometrics (2,
122). The brain also continues to develop throughout the 20s, but
most of this growth is in the frontal lobe, which controls decision-
making, 
while 
the 
motor-related 
brain 
areas 
are 
already
developmentally complete (2). The aspects of brain function that can
continue to improve into the early 30s include visual-perceptual
skills. Reactive agility training (see chapter 20) is a type of training
that can improve these visual-perceptual skills (2). The additional
439

benefits beyond improvements in athletic performance due to
improved reaction time and cognitive processing include a reduction
in the risk of falls later in life (2).
During puberty the production of estrogen in girls increases fat
deposition 
and 
breast 
development, 
whereas 
testosterone
production in boys increases bone formation and protein synthesis.
Though estrogen also stimulates bone growth, boys have a longer
growth period and commence puberty at a later stage, and therefore
adult men tend to achieve greater overall stature than adult women
(2). On average, adult females tend to have more body fat, less
muscle, and lower bone mineral density than adult males.
Furthermore, females tend to be lighter in total body weight than
males. Anthropometric measurements of adults indicate that males
tend to have broader shoulders relative to their hips and females
tend to have broader hips relative to their waist and shoulders. The
broader shoulders in males can support more muscle tissue and can
also provide a mechanical advantage for muscles acting at the
shoulder. Although some female athletes have lower fat percentages
than untrained males, extremely low body fat percentages in
females may be associated with adverse health consequences (124,
125).
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass and bone mineral density is
important for both athletic performance and health. Without a
sustained resistance training program, muscle mass and bone
density begin a pattern of decline in the mid-30s, which can
accelerate after approximately age 50, especially when accompanied
by menopause (120, 152). Therefore, females should be encouraged
to participate in long-term resistance training programs to counteract
the skeletal and muscular changes that will otherwise occur with
aging. Another benefit of maintaining or increasing muscle mass
aside from athletic performance is the extension of the time females
can engage in sport and reduce their risk of injury (154), as well as
maintaining the ability to perform activities of daily living and
independence into old age (18, 121, 182).
440

A key focus of any resistance training program for a
female should be to maintain muscle mass and bone
mineral density, both of which are important for athletic
performance and overall health.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy occurs only when pubertal sexual development is
complete and prior to menopause (average age between 12-51
years). There are significant and specific physiological and
anatomical changes that occur during each of the trimesters of
pregnancy and postpartum periods, which can affect physical
training and performance (table 8.1).
Multiple professional organizations have recommendations for
physical activity and exercise during pregnancy (20, 21, 26, 123,
188). All of the published guidelines promote exercise as a minimal-
risk activity that has benefits for most females during pregnancy,
with some modifications to programming and specific exercises
required as pregnancy progresses due to normal anatomic and
physiologic changes that occur. These guidelines are presented in
table 8.2.
For pregnant females, program design variables (exercise
selection, frequency, intensity, and duration) should be based on the
baseline level of fitness of the athlete immediately prior to the
confirmation of pregnancy. Resistance training at a moderate
intensity during pregnancy has many benefits including improved
blood sugar levels and improved insulin usage, as well as improved
feelings of energy and reduction of fatigue (181). Studies on elite
athletes have shown that they are able to manage a variety of
training loads and intensities and still deliver healthy babies and
return to their sport (168); however, most of the research is on more
moderate loads. Vigorous-intensity exercise, including high-intensity
interval training, is tolerated well among females with healthy
pregnancies and who previously engaged in vigorous training, but
441

caution is elicited in exceeding 90% of maximum heart rate until
more research is performed (13, 169).
Pregnancy is a unique condition with specific challenges
to resistance training program design. An awareness of
the normal physiological changes during pregnancy is
very important to being able to design a safe, effective,
and individualized resistance training program for a
pregnant female.
TABLE 8.1 Physiological and Anatomical Changes in
Pregnancy
Trimester
Cardiorespiratory
Musculoskeletal
Metabolic
First
Increased cardiac output
by 20%
Decrease in peripheral
vascular resistance
Increase in blood volume
Increased tidal volume
Increase in minute
ventilation (40%-50%) and
V̇O2max
Weight gain and
increased forces on
joints
Increase in ligament
laxity
Changes in micro-
architecture of bone
but not overall bone
mass
Increase in
metabolic
rate
Increase in
body
temperature
Second (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)
Increased cardiac output
by 40%
Decrease in peripheral
vascular resistance by
25%-30%
Increase in blood volume,
with steady fall in
hemoglobin
Fluid retention and edema
Supine positions decrease
venous return to heart,
which decreases stroke
volume and cardiac output
Changes in center of
gravity
Increase in loss of
balance
Sources: (86a, 89b, 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
442

Trimester
Cardiorespiratory
Musculoskeletal
Metabolic
Third (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)
Slight decrease in cardiac
output at term with stroke
volume decreasing and
heart rate increasing
Peripheral vascular
resistance begins to
increase from 32 weeks
Blood volume increases
50% of prepregnancy
levels with a 50% increase
in plasma volume by 34
weeks
Increase in lumbar
lordosis
Increase in foot size
Increase in
compression
neuropathies
10 weeks
postpartum
Most cardiovascular and
respiratory changes return
to prepregnancy levels
within the first 1-2 weeks
after delivery
Pelvic floor
dysfunction
Urinary incontinence
Increase in ligament
laxity (may persist
up to 5 months after
delivery)
Sources: (86a, 89b, 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
TABLE 8.2 General Exercise Recommendations and
Associated Signs and Symptoms of Exercising During
Pregnancy
Trimester
Exercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
First
Continue activity at prepregnancy levels and intensities but
monitor for adverse signs and symptoms.
Misinterpretation of maximum heart rate, reaching it sooner in
pregnancy. Use combined approach of heart rate and perceived
exertion to monitor intensity.
Initiate pelvic floor exercises to assist in labor and delivery and
help with urinary incontinence.
Increase squatting activities with body weight and loaded to
maintain strength and improve labor and delivery.
Increase water intake.
Sources: (86a, 89b, 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
443

Trimester
Exercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
Second (in addition
to prior trimesters)
Avoid supine positions and exercises; switch to incline, side-
lying, or vertical positions.
Continue pelvic floor exercises to assist in labor and delivery and
help with urinary incontinence.
Third (in addition to
prior trimesters)
Modify activity based on signs, symptoms, and maternal comfort.
Continue to monitor for adverse signs and symptoms.
Avoid supine positions and exercises; switch to incline, side-
lying, or vertical positions.
Modify activities to decrease discomfort or symptoms of
neuropathy.
10 weeks
postpartum
Pelvic floor exercises (i.e., Kegel exercises) immediately after
delivery for at least 12-24 weeks.
Core stabilization exercises immediately after delivery for at least
12-24 weeks.
Gradual return to physical activity and sport-related activities.
Increase water intake.
With Cesarean deliveries, more time may be needed to restore
abdominal muscles to prepregnancy strength and stabilization.
Sources: (86a, 89b, 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
Injury and Health Considerations in
Female Athletes
Female athletes face higher risks of specific injuries and health
concerns than male athletes, possibly due to anatomical and
biomechanical differences. Strength and conditioning professionals
should emphasize lower extremity biomechanics and proper exercise
techniques to address injury risk. Female athletes also experience
higher rates of sport-related concussions, and mental health
concerns can be notable. Sleep deprivation heightens their risk for
injury and impairs recovery; thus, sleep education is essential.
Additionally, pelvic floor dysfunction, especially urinary incontinence,
affects female athletes at a higher rate, often affecting their activity
level and risk of injury.
444

Anterior Cruciate Ligament
It is important for strength and conditioning professionals to be
aware of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries in female
athletes, particularly in sports such as soccer, lacrosse, and
basketball (3, 4). According to a number of reports, ACL injuries
occur in greater absolute frequencies in males (122), but in
comparable sports female athletes’ relative rate of ACL injuries is two
times higher than those reported for male athletes (3, 4, 78, 86,
114). Although it is possible that the increasing absolute number of
knee injuries simply reflects an increase in participation by females
in organized sport, others have suggested causative factors. It is
possible that the high muscular resistance and knee torque during
high-load landing and rapid change-of-direction movements may
cause microdamage or strain on the ACL over time, increasing the
risk for injury for all athletes (12, 187). However, female athletes
may have other factors contributing to an increase in the rate of ACL
injury, such as anatomical, biomechanical, and external factors.
Anatomical factors, such as femoral notch size reducing tensile
strength, greater tibial slope increasing strain, and ligament laxity
(45, 74, 98, 163), may contribute to heightened ACL injury risk in
females. However, it is believed that the most significant contributing
factor is a neuromuscular deficiency, which ultimately leads to
abnormal biomechanics such as increased dynamic knee valgus upon
contact with the ground (128). Therefore, sociocultural factors such
as motor development experience, training opportunities and
resources, gendered development, and sex inequality in sporting
opportunities (27, 130, 142) should be examined as causal for the
higher ACL injury risk for female athletes.
Evidence suggests that in order to reduce the risk of ACL injury,
youth should participate in preparatory conditioning before puberty
to optimize training adaptations (128) and continue across the life
span. Many ACL injuries in female athletes occur from noncontact
mechanisms (e.g., deceleration, lateral pivoting or landing) (4, 23),
which makes engaging in progressive overload training, plyometrics,
445

agility, and balance training that is designed and delivered by a
strength and conditioning professional critical to reducing the risk of
ACL injuries (6, 51, 79, 183). Additional clinical trials are needed to
determine the best method for reducing the incidence of ACL injuries
in female athletes and improving adherence to these training
protocols.
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome
Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS) is a broad term used for
pain arising from the patellofemoral joint, also known as runner’s
knee or jumper’s knee (24). Female athletes are more than two
times more likely to have incidences of PFPS compared to male
athletes (25). PFPS has been shown to be attributed to the hip
mechanics in female athletes before puberty, and modified
mechanics in the knee may be related to PFPS throughout
development in female athletes (60). Strength and conditioning
professionals should focus on lower extremity biomechanics, exercise
technique, 
imbalances, 
and 
weaknesses 
with 
any 
athlete
experiencing PFPS to improve outcomes. The National Athletic
Trainers’ Association has a position statement that provides guidance
to practitioners on how to manage patellofemoral pain in athletes,
including use of bracing, taping, or other modifications (24).
Bone Stress Injuries
Bone stress injuries, including stress fractures, have regularly
been shown to occur at a higher rate in female athletes than in male
athletes (34, 153). The accumulation of repetitive stress, bone stress
injuries frequently occur in athletes (1, 153) and are considered
overuse injuries, where abnormal bone remodeling occurs (180).
Strength and conditioning professionals should continue to monitor
workload, and though it is challenging to identify individual bone
stress tolerance, it is possible to generally monitor bone health and
symptoms of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) (124).
(See chapter 11 for more information on RED-S.) Additionally, other
446

risk factors could be identified through a screening process for bone
stress injuries, such as vitamin D levels and early sport specialization
(1, 180). Continuing to prescribe exercises that are osteogenically
stimulating and alerting workload through periodization may assist in
reducing bone stress injuries for female athletes.
Concussions
A concussion, or mild traumatic brain injury, is an impact to the
head or body that causes the brain to move rapidly back and forth in
the skull, which disrupts normal brain function (73). Female athletes
are at an increased incidence of sport-related concussions in some
sports (soccer, basketball, softball), with hockey having the highest
incidence of concussions compared to male athletes in similar sports
(35, 41, 133). Female athletes have been shown to have twice the
rate of contact with equipment and surfaces compared to male
athletes. However, player-to-player contact has been shown to be
similar in both female and male athletes for causing concussions (32,
97). Other factors, such as biomechanical and hormonal differences,
may lead to a greater susceptibility of concussions in female athletes
(109, 151, 161). Female athletes experience longer recovery time
with prolonged symptoms after a concussion compared to male
athletes (32, 41, 109, 161). When multiple concussions occur, female
athletes experience lower cerebral blood flow (70) and greater
changes between single- and dual-task gait activities compared to a
single concussive event (81).
Concussion 
management, 
prevention, 
and 
return-to-play
programs should consider the sex differences in injury mechanics.
However, due to a lack of female athlete–specific research in
concussion management programs, there should be an individualized
approach for concussion management and return to play based on
clinical presentation, regardless of sex (109, 151). The American
Medical Association for Sports Medicine position statement on
concussion in sport can guide practitioners on the clinical diagnosis,
assessment, and management in athletic populations (73).
447

How Can Female Athletes Reduce Their
Injury Risk?
To help female athletes reduce their injury risk, strength and conditioning
professionals should do the following:
Recommend preparticipation screening by a sports medicine physician. This
should include identification of risk factors for injury along with
musculoskeletal testing.
Encourage female athletes to participate in a year-round conditioning
program that includes resistance, plyometric, speed and agility, and flexibility
training. The conditioning program should meet the specific needs of each
athlete and should progress in a periodized fashion that allows for training
adaptations to continually manifest.
Ensure that females learn, and can repeatedly demonstrate, correct
movement mechanics (e.g., jumping, landing, twisting, and cutting) within a
variety of environments.
Precede every exercise session with a general dynamic warm-up and a
specific warm-up using movements that resemble those involved in the
activity and that target the activation of key muscle groups (e.g., posterior
chain muscle groups).
Provide augmented feedback within training sessions to optimize skill transfer
and enhance biomechanics related to injury.
Mental Health
Mental health has gained increasingly more attention in athletes
with a focus on sport organizations and practitioners to take a
holistic approach when training athletes (33, 57, 77, 149). Athletes
are exposed to additional mental health risk factors (77, 149), and
female athletes in particular are at higher risk for certain mental
health symptoms and prevalence compared to male athletes (5,
179). Research suggests that female athletes may have poor mental
health outcomes due to an increased risk of certain disorders (e.g.,
burnout, eating disorders, disordered eating, anxiety, depression) (5,
75, 144, 149) and are subjected to increased appearance-based
pressure (8, 144), discrimination, and financial strain than male
athletes (179).
448

Research also suggests that elite female athletes are twice as
likely to self-report symptoms of depression than male athletes (63),
which may inhibit health and performance. In 2021, 40% of
collegiate female athletes reported experiencing overwhelming
anxiety compared to 22% in collegiate male athletes (189).
Early detection of mental health issues is critical, and
strength 
and 
conditioning 
practitioners 
should
understand symptoms and how these issues arise and
should promote and provide environments that support
an athlete’s mental health, prevention, and treatment
team and strategies of mental health disorders.
Sleep
A majority of athletes receive less-than-age-appropriate sleep levels,
and a loss in sleep for athletes is a known risk factor for increased
injury risk (15, 16, 157). Female collegiate athletes may be
particularly likely to have low sleep durations that are consistent with
sleep deprivation (<7 h/night), in association with daytime
sleepiness and dysfunction (30, 69). Sleep quantity (113, 116) and
quality have been shown to be lower after training and competition
in female athletes (134, 136). Education on sleep hygiene for
athletes, coaches, and support practitioners has been shown to
address some barriers preventing good sleep quality and thus has
been shown to improve sleep in athletes (115, 135). Improving sleep
quality and quantity is critical for optimal recovery (178).
Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) is a term used to identify various
impairments of the pelvic floor muscles that support the pelvic
organs and promote continence (99, 107). The most common PFDs
are urinary incontinence (UI) and stress urinary incontinence
(SUI) among several others (7, 42, 107). UI is an involuntary loss of
urine, and SUI is an involuntary loss of urine with any physical
449

exertion (22, 150). It has been reported that UI in female athletes
occurs 5 times more compared to male athletes, and 2.7 times more
compared to sedentary females (42, 150, 164, 172). Female athletes
have an overall 27% prevalence of UI compared to male athletes,
and a 36% prevalence of UI compared to sedentary females (42,
150, 164, 172). Participating in sport has been reported to be one of
the main causes of UI in female athletes, with high-impact and high-
loading sports increasing incidence of SUI.
UI may be due to the imbalance of contraction strength and an
increase in abdominal pressure that results in deformation of the
connective tissue (99, 107). Programs should include prevention,
lifestyle modifications, pelvic floor strengthening, biofeedback, and
pharmacological interventions. Female athletes should be taught
how to properly engage their pelvic floor muscles and abdominal
wall muscles, and in some cases may need to see a physical
therapist that specializes in PFD. With proper education and pelvic
floor treatment, females can recover from UI (46, 55).
How Can Females Improve Their Health
Outcomes?
To help females improve their health outcomes, strength and conditioning
professionals should do the following:
Recommend working with appropriate medical staff to provide resources and
services as needed when they have identified signs and symptoms of
concerns that increase risk of health issues
Encourage females to seek services from a mental health provider when
initial symptoms of mental health disorders arise
Educate females on the appropriate amount and quality of sleep needed and
the important role it plays in the body’s recovery and for decreasing risk of
injury
Provide information to females about the variety of impairments that can
occur in the pelvic floor and encourage females to seek a specialized physical
therapist in PFD when signs and symptoms occur
450

Training Responses and Adaptations
Before resistance training programs can be properly designed,
understanding the physiological responses to a resistance training
session and adaptations to regularly performing a resistance training
program are critical. The main body systems involved are the
musculoskeletal, metabolic, and endocrine systems, which have
varying levels of response and adaptation differences between males
and females. These differences can affect how programming
priorities are set, which is important for obtaining the optimum
training results.
Musculoskeletal
Resistance training offers a multitude of benefits for females,
including the attenuation of age-related declines in bone mineral
density (89). Specifically, the stress from the mechanical loading
applied via resistance training directly increases the magnitude of
skeletal remodeling and therefore bone mass. Resistance training
can increase bone mineral density in various skeletal regions of the
body (89). It is also known that higher intensities of resistance
training promote greater degrees of osteogenesis (103) and that
preadolescence is an opportune time to participate in weight-bearing
and other loaded activities in order to enhance bone mineral density
(65, 80).
Through participation in a resistance training program, females
can also experience muscle hypertrophy. When sophisticated
techniques (e.g., computed tomography) are used to accurately
measure changes in muscle cross-sectional area, relative short-term
(up to 16 weeks) gains in muscle hypertrophy are similar between
sexes (43, 67). When the muscular development of female
weightlifters, bodybuilders, and track and field athletes who have
not used anabolic steroids is examined, it is obvious that muscle
hypertrophy is possible in females who regularly participate in high-
volume or high-intensity training programs, even though these gains
451

may be less than in males. A genetic disposition to develop a large
muscle mass may also be a contributing factor (166).
Metabolic
The metabolic system is a key system in physical activity, and
understanding its function is necessary to understanding the acute
responses and training adaptations of the other body systems. While
the metabolic system operates similarly in males and females, some
differences exist that relate to the amount and type of muscle mass,
which can affect the magnitude of training-related adaptations.
However, there is a lack of research comparing males and females of
similar training backgrounds, as well as in high-level athletes, which
limits the understanding of the metabolic system and how it adapts
in female athletes.
Anaerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide short-term energy include
ATP-PCr and glycolysis. While all muscle fibers can produce energy
with all types of biochemical pathways, the faster muscle fibers that
have a greater capacity for force production have a greater amount
of the substrates (phosphocreatine, glycogen) and enzymes needed
for the nonoxidative biochemical pathways (see chapter 3). On
average, males have a slightly higher proportion of these faster
(type II) muscle fiber types (84, 165). While both males and females
have the capacity to undergo muscle hypertrophy with various types
of anaerobic training, as previously indicated, the level of absolute
hypertrophy attained by males will exceed that of females, resulting
in greater storage potential for phosphocreatine and glycogen,
creatine kinase, and glycolytic enzymes, as well as greater overall
glycolytic capacity (54, 155).
Aerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide energy for long-duration
activities involve the oxidative energy systems (i.e., Kreb’s cycle,
452

electron transport chain, and lipid oxidation), which continuously
supply energy at rest and for lower intensity activities (62). The
oxidative pathways depend on the cardiorespiratory system’s ability
to supply oxygen and remove metabolic wastes, and research
reviews have presented differences in males and females under
various conditions (9, 29, 96, 186). Female endurance athletes have
been shown to be more fatigue resistant during prolonged events,
despite having overall lower aerobic capacity (V̇O2max) relative to
body size and slower performance times than males (17, 48). This is
thought to be due to muscle fiber type distribution (165), with
females having a greater proportion of type I oxidative fibers on
average. Females therefore oxidize a greater amount of fat and a
lesser amount of carbohydrate and protein (40, 170). This finding is
supported by Cardinale (2018), who determined that females have
close to 33% greater mitochondrial respiration than males. These
differences may present an advantage to female athletes in most
types of endurance activities, including ultraendurance events (174).
Training adaptations in the aerobic energy pathways differ in
magnitude between males and females with regard to the
cardiovascular system in particular (145), which affects oxygen
delivery to the muscle tissue and subsequent oxidative energy
production. In females, more modest increases in blood volume and
similar or lesser increases in heart dimensions such as left
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness result from aerobic
endurance training (11, 44) when compared to males. However,
female athletes have similar adaptations compared to males with
regard to left ventricle function, including a greater ejection fraction
(159). Females also present more efficient oxygen cost of running
than males at various running intensities (76) while maintaining their
running economy across a range of velocities. All of these factors
affect overall aerobic performance, with females compensating for
smaller hearts and less oxygen-carrying capacity by different
mechanisms than males.
453

Endocrine
The endocrine system is responsible for regulating physiological
responses and adaptations to the various stressors encountered,
including physical activity. In response to strength training and
conditioning, the endocrine system regulates muscular repair and
growth (58, 95) as the various anabolic and catabolic mechanisms
triggered by the endocrine system affect the ability of skeletal
muscle to generate force and to adapt to training (95). The
immediate, or acute, endocrine response to a training session
traditionally has been thought to be a greater catalyst for muscle
tissue growth and remodeling than the chronic changes in resting
hormonal concentrations (94).
While a large number of hormones perform a myriad of functions
within the human body, a much smaller number affect muscle
responses to training, and even fewer have been the focus of
research in athletic females. The primary hormones to have known
influence on muscle and strength development, which have been
studied in females, include testosterone, the growth hormone family,
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and cortisol. It is also
important to understand general function of the hormones involved
in the menstrual cycle, because they can influence training and
performance in female athletes and are found in much higher
concentrations than in males.
Testosterone
Testosterone is present in much higher concentrations in males than
in females, but females produce testosterone in small quantities in
the ovaries and the adrenal gland (52). However, resting
testosterone concentrations are highly variable among females,
which can account for the variability in responsiveness to resistance
training of absolute hypertrophy and strength (67), although relative
levels of hypertrophy and strength are similar between the sexes.
Despite low testosterone concentrations, females experience
stimulation of muscle protein synthesis (185). With an acute bout of
454

resistance exercise, females do not exhibit significant elevations in
testosterone concentrations (95, 177). However, with prolonged
training, some acute elevations in testosterone have been observed
in females (137). These increases are likely due to a combination of
factors including a decreased rate of degradation, evidenced by
lower measures of metabolites of testosterone breakdown (49).
Therefore, in females, testosterone likely still has an important role
in the development of absolute muscular size, strength, and power
with resistance training and may also be an important indicator of
the trainability of an individual (67, 68).
Growth Hormones and Growth Factors
Growth hormones (GH) have a primary role in muscle tissue
remodeling and repair but do not function alone, because muscle
protein synthesis is triggered with the growth factor known as
IGF-1. In females, it has been demonstrated that resting
concentrations of GH are higher than in males (92) and with chronic
training, GH levels at rest are lower in females compared to males
(171), which could indicate a greater sensitivity to the hormone, but
research is lacking.
After chronic resistance training, circulating GH rises similarly in
females and males. Following an acute resistance exercise bout in
females, circulating GH concentrations increase two- to fourfold (66,
83). The magnitude of the circulating GH increase depends on the
type of exercise stimulus as well as the amount of total work
performed. For example, exercise sessions consisting of high total
work (10RM load) and shorter rest intervals (1 minute) (92), large
muscle groups (95), multi-set protocols (126), and exercises that
induce elevations in blood lactate and reductions in blood glucose
(91, 95) result in significant elevations in GH. With training, the
magnitude of the exercise-induced rise in GH increases (171).
455

Cortisol
Cortisol is an important hormone that helps regulate blood glucose
levels as well as inflammation. Cortisol rises in anticipation of
exercise and sport competition in order to prepare the body for the
upcoming psychological and metabolic demands (118, 140). This
anticipatory rise has been shown to be greater in trained females
than in sedentary females (47). The cortisol response to acute
exercise is greatest in resistance exercise protocols that result in
higher levels of GH (91) and blood lactate (90). Several
investigations have demonstrated that in comparison to males, the
cortisol response to acute exercise is attenuated in females (58, 66,
140). This is thought to be due to higher cortisol sensitivity in
females (156) or the impact of female sex hormones on modulating
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, adrenal glands, and
hypothalamus-pituitary axis (175).
Training influences the magnitude of the cortisol response in
females. Elite female athletes do not exhibit an anticipatory rise in
cortisol before exercise (47) but do exhibit higher cortisol secretion
and different patterns of secretion (158). In addition, female sex
hormones (estradiol and progesterone) may lower cortisol
responsivity, thereby potentially altering the effects of cortisol over
the menstrual cycle (104). Immune factors modulate glucocorticoid
sensitivity (59), accounting for differences observed in female
athletes.
The Menstrual Cycle
Females experience the menstrual cycle during adolescence and
adulthood, approximately between the ages of 12 and 50 (56).
While the cycle is usually discussed in terms of reproductive
function, the menstrual cycle hormones also influence other body
functions that are related to exercise and training (37). There are
also times during the menstrual cycle when the body experiences
symptoms such as cramping, nausea, and headaches, which may
negatively affect the ability to engage in exercise sessions or a
456

training program. Therefore, it is important that practitioners have a
general understanding of the menstrual cycle and its physical
effects.
In brief, two primary hormones are released from the ovaries
during the menstrual cycle, estradiol and progesterone. During the
initial half of the cycle, menstrual bleeding occurs and then estradiol
peaks and drops. Progesterone rises and peaks during the second
half of the cycle, and there is a second but lesser peak of estradiol.
By the end of the cycle, both estradiol and progesterone drop to
their lowest levels (figure 8.1).
Estradiol
In menstruating adult females, the primary form of estrogen is
estradiol, which has been shown to directly affect the structure and
function of muscle, tendon, and ligaments, as well as contribute to
muscle mass and strength (37). Estradiol appears to have a more
protective effect on skeletal muscle (100) by attenuating the amount
of damage. To do this, estradiol may decrease postexercise
membrane disruption, act as an antioxidant, act as a membrane
stabilizer, and mediate inflammatory cell infiltration (53, 141). In
addition, estradiol may influence contractile properties of skeletal
muscle and muscle protein turnover (71). This supports muscle mass
development by promoting protein synthesis over degradation and
enhancing sensitivity of the response to resistance training (71, 72).
High levels of estradiol are not always beneficial because decreases
in power and performance can result, which can increase the risk for
catastrophic ligament injuries (37). Low levels of estradiol are
equally problematic, resulting in increased muscle cell death and
reduced skeletal muscle mass and strength (39, 87).
457

FIGURE 8.1 Phases of the menstrual cycle and the concomitant changes in estrogen and
progesterone.
Reprinted by permission from W.L. Kenney, J.H. Wilmore, and D.L. Costill, “Sex Differences in Sport and Exercise,” in
Physiology of Sport and Exercise, 9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2024).
After an acute bout of resistance exercise, increased estradiol
concentrations have been reported (94, 158). This response may
occur due to increased activity of the enzyme that converts
testosterone to estrogen (estradiol) (129), which may also contribute
to increases in circulating testosterone (101). Because of the
beneficial effects of estrogen on muscle, it is important for females
to maintain normal menstrual cycle function in order to maximize
their adaptations to training (37) and reduce the risks associated
with low estradiol levels (173).
458

Resistance Training Considerations
With resistance training, the primary goal is to improve strength and
power. When comparing training-induced changes in muscular
strength between sexes, it is important to distinguish between
absolute 
and 
relative 
measures. 
Sex-related 
differences 
in
hypertrophy and muscle mass (106, 132, 143) indicate that absolute
muscle strength in females is lower than in males (108, 117),
whereas males’ greater absolute strength is primarily achieved by
larger muscle fiber size (117, 146, 160). The absolute lower body
strength of females is generally closer to male values compared to
the absolute values for upper body strength (10, 82, 84, 117). Sex-
related 
differences 
in 
body 
composition, 
anthropometric
characteristics, and distribution of fat-free mass can partly explain
these sex-related differences, which are apparent in recreationally
trained individuals as well as highly trained athletes (14).
When considered on a relative basis, sex-related differences in
muscular strength are greatly reduced. Females have similar number
of muscle fibers as males, and strength is similar when normalized to
muscle volume (113, 117). Differences in hypertrophy between
males and females may be due to a variety of factors such as
endocrine and genetics because they relate to regulating muscle
mass (184), whereas factors such as muscle cross-sectional area and
enzyme activity may contribute to strength and performance
differences (85, 131, 162). Because the average male and female
differ considerably in body size, it is useful to compare sex
differences in strength relative to body weight, fat-free mass, and
muscle cross-sectional area (14, 31). When expressed relative to
body weight, the lower body strength of females is similar to that of
males, while the upper body strength of females is still somewhat
less (10, 82, 84, 117). If comparisons are made relative to fat-free
mass, differences in strength between males and females tend to
disappear (10, 82, 84, 117).
459

Sex-related differences in power output are similar to those for
muscular strength. Measurements comparing power outputs of
female athletes relative to lean body mass were reported to be
similar for lower body power and still presented differences for upper
body power when compared to male athletes (10, 61). Although the
data are equivocal, sex-related differences in the rate of force
development (147, 148) and the recruitment differences in muscle
activation where females express lower levels of type IIa fibers’
percent of myosin heavy chain isoform content (138, 139) could
partly explain these findings.
During progressive overload and targeted training, female athletes
experience substantial power and strength increases similar to male
athletes (64). In a recent study, maximal strength and vertical jump
height were increased in collegiate volleyball players by using a
combination of traditional resistance training exercises and
weightlifting variations at various loads in addition to volleyball
practice, over the course of about 2.5 years of training (88). Other
research supports plyometrics in female basketball players and other
velocity-based resistance training in cyclists to improve strength,
power, and muscle hypertrophy (36, 119). It has also been reported
that adding heavy strength training to a female athlete’s endurance
training increased muscle strength, performance, and size without
affecting endurance running performance or running economy (176).
Several studies have investigated menstrual cycle phase and
exercise performance, with some effects indicating that the phase of
cycle has an effect on performance in eumenorrheic females (111).
Additional research shows that in naturally cycling females, there are
minimal differences in strength measures between phases (19). The
practical relevance of phase-based training comes into question of
whether it is feasible to track female athletes’ cycles when
considering the variety of hormonal contraceptives they may be
using or menstrual cycle irregularities, especially in team-based
sports in which the number of athletes is high.
460

The most recent evidence on menstrual cycle and performance
from meta-analyses did not conclude any systematic relationship
between performance and menstrual cycle phase in trained female
athletes (38, 50, 111, 112). Other considerations are necessary to
consider, such as varying menstrual cycle symptoms among female
athletes and the effect on their sleep and recovery during all stages
of the menstrual cycle (110). Consequently, the current evidence
does not support modifying prescription of resistance training based
on a female athlete’s menstrual cycle phase.
461

Conclusion
Evidence indicates that resistance exercise can be a safe and
effective method of training for female athletes of all ages and
abilities. The potential benefits are multifactorial, including positive
effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g., strength
and power), health markers (e.g., body composition and cardiac
function), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image and
confidence). Moreover, regular participation in resistance training
programs 
can 
better 
prepare 
female 
athletes 
to 
increase
performance and decrease risk of injury. Though the fundamental
principles of resistance training are similar for people of both sexes,
there are unique considerations specific to female athletes.
Knowledge of sex-related differences is essential to the development
and evaluation of safe and effective resistance training programs.
Strength and conditioning professionals should be aware that
individual responses to resistance exercise may vary greatly
independent of sex and should be sensitive to the individual needs
of all participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of sex-related differences
and their implications for resistance exercise. Their work has
quantified the impact of resistance training on female athletes and
has provided the foundation for recommendations about the design
of strength and conditioning programs. The information in this
chapter and other chapters should help strength and conditioning
professionals understand and appreciate sex-related differences and
enhance their ability to develop safe and effective resistance training
programs for females.
KEY TERMS
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
bone stress injuries
462

concussion
cortisol
endocrine system
estradiol
estrogen
growth factor
growth hormones (GH)
menstrual cycle
mental health
osteogenesis
patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS)
pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD)
pregnancy
progesterone
relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)
stress urinary incontinence (SUI)
testosterone
urinary incontinence (UI)
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not one of the physical changes
related to growth and development that occur well into
adulthood and may affect resistance training and conditioning
in females?
  a.  increased bone mineral density
  b.  closure of growth plates
  c.  improved visual-perceptual skills
  d.  increased muscle mass
  2.  Which of the following musculoskeletal changes occurs with
pregnancy and can affect resistance training programming?
  a.  increased body temperature
  b.  decreased cardiac output
  c.  increased ligament laxity
463

  d.  decreased venous return in supine positions
  3.  Estradiol, one of the main hormones in the menstrual cycle,
has which of the following effects in the body?
  a.  promotes muscle protein synthesis and reduces muscle
protein degradation
  b.  increases the amount of muscle damage with training
  c.  negatively influences the contractile properties of muscle
  d.  increases postexercise muscle cell membrane disruption
  4.  When a female athlete has multiple concussions, which of the
following does she not experience?
  a.  lower cerebral blood flow
  b.  fewer changes between single-task gait activities
  c.  greater changes between single-task gait activities
  d.  greater changes between dual-task gait activities
  5.  When creating a program for a female athlete, which of the
following is the most important to consider?
  a.  individualization
  b.  sex differences
  c.  sport differences
  d.  generalization by sport
464
