CHAPTER 9
PSYCHOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF
PERFORMANCE
Daniel B. Hollander, EdD, and Adam Feit, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Traci A. Statler,
Andrea M. DuBois, Bradley D. Hatfield, and Evan B. Brody to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the psychological constructs of arousal, motivation,
focus, and confidence and be able to ascertain their impact on
physical performance;
comprehend terms relevant to psychological areas of concern,
such as anxiety, attention, and the ideal performance state;
understand signs and symptoms of mental health issues,
predisposing factors to injury, psychological recovery,
techniques to handle fear of reinjury, introduction of
rehabilitation-type strength and conditioning, performance
psychology concepts, arousal management concepts such as
self-efficacy, imagery, goal setting, progressive muscle
relaxation, and centering;
understand varying ways to manipulate practice schedules
including coaching psychology of motor learning, whole–part,
465

random, and variable practice and how to use these schedules
to facilitate skill acquisition and learning; and
understand different types of instructions and feedback and
their application in a practice and performance setting.
Excellence in athletic performance is the result of sound skill and
physical training accompanied by optimal rest and recovery cycles
and appropriate diet. The role of sport psychology is to help athletes
achieve more consistent levels of performance at or near their
physical potential by carefully managing their physical resources
through appropriate psychological strategies and techniques. By
understanding these strategies and techniques, strength and
conditioning professionals can better design sport-specific and even
position-specific training programs with the ultimate goal of
maximizing performance.
After introducing foundational concepts, we address how one’s
mind, through cognition, can influence physical performance, and
then we describe the ideal performance state—the ultimate goal
of every athlete. In part, this state is marked by psychological and
physiological efficiency (i.e., employing only the amount of
mental and physical energy required to perform the task). We
discuss the primary psychological influences—motivation, attention,
and arousal—on skill acquisition and performance, citing several
theories of how these phenomena can change psychomotor learning
and athletic performance. Understanding mental health and the
impact of injuries on psychological states of athletes is discussed.
Finally, we describe coaching techniques and cues, including goal
setting, 
energy 
management 
and 
relaxation, 
imagery, 
and
confidence development, that can be employed to enhance overall
performance in strength and conditioning environments, as well as
other performance venues.
466

Role of Sport Psychology
An athlete is someone who engages in a social comparison (i.e.,
competition) involving psychomotor skill or physical prowess (or
both) in an institutionalized setting, typically under public scrutiny or
evaluation. The essence of athletic competition involves comparing
oneself to others and putting ego and self-esteem on the line in a
setting that is bound by rules and regulations. The psychologically
well-prepared athlete is characterized by efficiency of thought and
behavior. Efficiency is typically associated with skilled performance,
when actions are fluid and graceful, which conserves energy. The
concept can also be extended to psychological activity; an efficient
athlete adopts a task-relevant focus, not wasting attention on task-
irrelevant processing such as worrying, catastrophizing, or thinking
about other things such as critical external observers such as a
coach or audience.
Sport psychology is a multifaceted discipline, drawing on
constructs of exercise science and psychological principles, that
seeks to understand the influence of behavioral processes and
cognitions on sport performance. Sport psychology is typically
classified as a scientific field of study within sports medicine and has
three major goals:
Measuring psychological phenomena
Investigating the relationships between psychological variables
and performance
Applying 
theoretical 
knowledge 
to 
improve 
athletic
performance
By applying the information gained through an awareness of sport
psychology principles, athletes can better manage their physical
resources, thereby producing more effective performances. In
reality, many athletes come into the training and competitive
environment with some rudimentary mental skills, but there is little
understanding of how these skills evolved or even how to best use
467

them for effective performance. Throughout this chapter we
introduce a structure for understanding the interrelationships not
only between the mental skills themselves but between the mental
skills and the physical, technical, and tactical skills being developed
in the weight room and on the practice field. Note, however, that
these skills can only be truly effective if they are understood,
practiced, and applied in a performance setting. Like the physical,
technical, and tactical constructs described throughout the rest of
this book, mental skills also need to be taught, practiced, integrated
into performance, and evaluated for effectiveness.
468

Ideal Performance State
The ideal performance state has been studied from a number of
perspectives. Williams and Krane (68) listed the following
characteristics that athletes typically report about this state:
Absence of fear—no fear of failure
No thinking about or analysis of performance (related to the
motor stage of automaticity)
A narrow focus of attention concentrated on the activity itself
A sense of effortlessness—an involuntary experience
A sense of personal control
A distortion of time and space, in which time seems to slow
In a sense, this ideal performance state seems to represent
everything that applied sport psychology programs attempt to
promote. There is an absence of negative self-talk, a strong feeling
of efficacy, and an adaptive focus on task-relevant cues. An
important aspect is that the athletes trust in their skill and
conditioning levels and just let it happen, without interference from
negative cognitive processes.
Kobe Bryant, a premier player in the National Basketball
Association, described being in this state, saying,
When that happens, you really do not try to focus on what’s
going on because … you could lose it in a second. Everything
becomes one noise—you don’t hear this or that; everything’s
just one noise—you’re not paying attention to one or the
other.… You just really try to stay in the present and not let
anything break that rhythm. Again, as long as you just kind of
stay there, you become oblivious to everything that’s going on.
You don’t think about your surroundings or what’s going on
with the crowd or the team. You’re kind of locked in.… You
have to really try to stay in the present and not let anything
break that rhythm.
469

Bryant’s comments richly reinforce many of the concepts discussed
throughout this chapter. It is important to remember that his mental
state rested largely on a sound physical training program and on a
history of performance success. Bryant exhibited phenomenal
physical prowess, arduously running sprints, training on the court,
and lifting weights in the off-season. Combined with superior
performance on the basketball court, such preparatory physical
effort contributed greatly to his focused, confident psychological
state.
470

Energy Management: Arousal, Anxiety,
and Stress
In order for athletes to perform effectively, they need to learn how
to best manage their mental and physical energy levels. Athletes
who waste energy through worry, anger, frustration, or anxiety
experience a greater likelihood of distraction and decreased self-
confidence, and they have less physical energy for when
performance is most important (20). Thus, the ability to maintain
self-control and manage energy reserves in a performance
environment is a critical skill for any performer.
Mental energy is generated, maintained, depleted, and refreshed
via our emotions. Emotions are temporary feeling states that occur
in response to events and that have both physiological and
psychological components (19). These emotions affect mental and
physical energy and therefore can have both beneficial and
detrimental effects on human performance. Emotions such as
excitement can be beneficial to performance, causing us to feel
motivated, 
which 
elevates 
self-confidence 
and 
reinforces
commitment levels. However, emotions can be detrimental when an
athlete is overexcited or underexcited (e.g., too amped up or too
flat) or when an athlete loses control of his or her emotions and
ceases to function effectively in a performance environment (e.g., an
athlete who cannot control his or her anger or frustration). Training
athletes to tap into their emotions to generate or elevate energy,
while maintaining a sense of control over those emotions, is a key
toward generating an ideal performance state (64).
By arming athletes with the mental tools to combat inappropriate
thoughts, enhance confidence, and reinforce motivation and
commitment, coaches are providing many of the skills necessary to
allow the athlete to maintain composure as well.
471

Arousal
The training environment provides a host of new and unfamiliar
experiences that create multiple opportunities to test oneself and be
evaluated for effectiveness. Because of this, athletic performance is
frequently affected by arousal, anxiety, and stress. These terms are
often used interchangeably; however, in reality, they are different
elements within the same construct.
Arousal is simply a blend of physiological and psychological
activation in an individual and refers to the intensity of motivation at
any given moment (64). For example, a psyched-up athlete may
experience tremendous mental activation characterized by positive
thoughts and a strong sense of control, whereas a flat athlete could
experience minimal activation characterized by wandering thoughts
and feelings of boredom. Arousal is always present in an individual
to some degree, on a continuum ranging from being deeply asleep,
or comatose, to highly excited; but in and of itself it is not
automatically associated with pleasant or unpleasant events. It is
simply a measurement of activation, and as such can be indexed by
such metrics as heart rate, blood pressure, electroencephalography
(EEG), electromyography (EMG), and catecholamine levels, or with
self-report instruments such as the activation–deactivation checklist
(63). The optimal arousal required for efficient performance depends
on several factors that are discussed later in the chapter.
Anxiety
Anxiety is a subcategory of arousal in that it is a negatively
perceived emotional state characterized by nervousness, worry,
apprehension, or fear and is associated with a physiological
activation of the body (64). Because anxiety requires the individual’s
negative perception of a situation, it incorporates a cognitive
component, called cognitive anxiety, as well as the physical
reaction, or somatic anxiety, evidenced through physical
symptoms such as tense muscles, tachycardia (fast heart rate), and
upset stomach.
472

The term anxiety is often confusingly used to refer to both a
stable, enduring personality construct and a more short-term,
changeable mood state. These are, in fact, different constructs
within the emotional state of anxiety. State anxiety refers to a
subjective experience of apprehension and uncertainty accompanied
by elevated autonomic and voluntary neural outflow and increased
endocrine activity (57). State anxiety is a generally negative
experience, but its effects on athletic performance can be positive,
negative, or indifferent, depending on such factors as the athlete’s
skill level and personality and the complexity of the task to be
performed.
State anxiety is distinct from but related to trait anxiety, a
personality variable or disposition relating to the probability that one
will perceive an environment as threatening. In essence, trait anxiety
acts as a primer for the athlete to experience state anxiety (58).
Trait anxiety also affects the appropriate level of arousal for a given
individual. People with high levels of trait anxiety tend to flood
attentional capacity with task-irrelevant cognitions, such as thoughts
of failure, catastrophe, or ego-oriented concerns. During a complex
decision-making task, these attentionally demanding cues could
compromise an athlete’s selective attention. The athlete with low
trait anxiety may handle higher levels of pressure with decreased
thoughts of task failure.
State anxiety is the actual experience of apprehension
and uncontrolled arousal. Trait anxiety is a personality
characteristic, which represents a latent disposition to
perceive situations as threatening.
In a non-anxious state, arousal is under the control of the athlete;
it can be elevated or lowered as needed. The athlete who is
psychologically well prepared knows the appropriate zone for optimal
performance and can manage it accordingly. In an over-anxious
state, arousal is relatively uncontrolled; muscles are tense, the heart
473

is racing, and negative thoughts intrude. This lack of physical and
psychological efficiency is typically initiated by uncertainty about
a present or anticipated event. At least three important factors are
usually present:
A high degree of ego involvement, in which the athlete may
perceive a threat to self-esteem
A perceived discrepancy between one’s ability and the
demands for athletic success
A fear of the consequences of failure (such as a loss of
approval from teammates, coach, family, or peers)
Because these constructs of anxiety and arousal are complex and
interrelated, figure 9.1 provides a summary of the interrelationships
of arousal, state anxiety, and trait anxiety and the cognitive and
somatic components of anxiety.
474

FIGURE 9.1 The interrelationships of arousal, trait anxiety, and state anxiety.
Reprinted by permission from R. Weinberg and D. Gould, Foundations of Sport and Exercise Psychology (Human
Kinetics, 2015).
Stress
Stress is defined as a substantial imbalance between demand
(physical, psychological, or both) and perceived response capability,
under conditions in which failure to meet that demand has important
consequences (51). A stressor is an environmental or cognitive
event that precipitates stress (i.e., the stress response). Stress can
be described as a negative (distress) or a positive (eustress)
state. Both of these generate arousal but only when the perception
of the stressor is negative—distress—does it also generate anxiety.
Therefore, distress comprises cognitive and somatic anxiety, whereas
eustress comprises positive mental energy and physiological arousal.
475

Theoretical Tenets of Arousal, Anxiety,
and Motivation on Performance
Once an understanding of the general concepts of arousal, anxiety,
and stress is attained, the next step lies in deconstructing how these
emotional elements influence performance. Why does arousal affect
one athlete beneficially and another detrimentally? This section
examines a number of theories and models that attempt to explain
this relationship between arousal and performance. It begins with
the simplest construct—Hull’s (56) drive theory—and builds on it
with Yerkes and Dodson’s (76) inverted-U theory, describing the
mediating influences of skill level, task complexity, and personality.
Other related theories that further explain this relationship are
outlined, including Hanin’s (23) individual zones of optimal
functioning (IZOF), Fazey and Hardy’s (24) catastrophe theory, and
finally, Kerr’s (30) reversal theory.
Drive Theory
When researchers first started examining the relationship between
arousal and performance, it was thought to follow a direct and linear
progression. Hull’s drive theory (56) proposes that as an
individual’s arousal or state anxiety increases, so too does
performance. Thus, the more psyched up athletes become, the
better they perform. This may hold true as an athlete progresses
from relatively low levels of arousal to somewhat higher amounts,
but most would recognize that more arousal is not always better,
because performers can clearly be too pumped up to perform well.
Depending on the skill and experience levels of the performer, the
complexity of the activity, or both, more arousal may be beneficial,
but it can in fact also be detrimental. When people perform well-
learned or simple skills, a higher level of arousal can benefit
performance. However, the more complex a given skill becomes, or
the less experience an athlete has with that skill, the more arousal
476

can produce catastrophic performance outcomes (64). Also, self-
confidence serves as a buffer for anxiety, and when self-confidence
goes down, anxiety typically increases.
Skill Level
An athlete’s skill level can increase the latitude of optimal arousal;
that is, the more skill an athlete has developed, the better he or she
can perform during states of less-than or greater-than-optimal
arousal (64). In the beginning stages of learning a skill, the athlete
is in a stage of analysis or cognition (17). This means that he or she
has to think about actions. For example, a novice basketball player
has to be conscious of the ball while dribbling and needs to devote
some attention to the task. At a given level of arousal, worrisome
thoughts compete with an attentional capacity already filled with
details of motor performance (i.e., dribbling). If a new situation
suddenly develops, the novice’s mind is already occupied, and he or
she may not see it.
The optimal arousal point is lower for less skilled athletes than for
more advanced athletes. Therefore, coaches should lower arousal
and decrease the decision-making responsibilities of developing or
unseasoned athletes (players who are skilled but lack competitive
experience) and have them focus on simple assignments to prevent
attentional overload. In coaching weightlifting athletes during an
important meet, instructions to novice competitors should be simple,
clear, and direct. When they experience success, the derived self-
confidence may reduce negative self-talk and the sense of
uncertainty that typically characterizes such performers.
Task Complexity
A second factor that influences the appropriate level of arousal to
achieve optimal performance is task complexity (42). Most athletic
skills are exceedingly complex from a biomechanical perspective, but
the more concerning complexity relates to conscious decision
making. For example, running is a very complex task in terms of
477

motor control and functional anatomy, but athletes fortunately do
not have to devote much conscious attention to this coordinated
action. In fact, the action can become altered and inefficient if they
think about it too much, because they change the neural sequences
for movement initiation. From an attentional perspective, simple or
well-learned skills are less affected by a high degree of arousal
because they have few task-relevant cues to monitor (64).
Fortunately, then, physiological arousal, which typically accompanies
emotional arousal, may be beneficial. However, the situation is
dramatically reversed for skills that necessitate conscious decision-
making effort, such as those required by a goalie in soccer or a
baseball catcher who is facing a critical, bases-loaded pitch. In these
instances, arousal must be optimized because of the need to
maintain a wider focus so as to recognize relevant attentional cues.
Inverted-U Theory
Building on the basic relationship outlined in drive theory, Yerkes and
Dodson (76) proposed one of the major tenets of the arousal–
performance relationship—the inverted-U theory. Basically, this
theory states that arousal facilitates performance up to an optimal
level, beyond which further increases in arousal are associated with
reduced performance. Figure 9.2 graphically shows this relationship.
Most coaches and athletes intuitively accept this hypothesis, because
they have all experienced poor performance when feeling flat or
under-aroused, as well as when they feel too amped up or out of
control. The inverted-U concept helps coaches and athletes
understand why arousal affects performance and enables them to
gain greater control over the appropriate level of arousal for a given
athlete within a given sport. It should be noted, however, that the
generic shape of the curve in this relationship has been criticized,
given our understanding of the individual influences of skill, ability,
experience, and task complexity as described previously (20).
478

Individual Zones of Optimal Functioning
Theory
Hanin (23) noted the interactions of individual factors that affect
optimal arousal for performance and developed the individual
zones of optimal functioning theory. Dr. Hanin holds that
different people, in different types of performances, perform best
with very different levels of arousal. This theory differs from the
inverted-U hypothesis in two ways: (1) Ideal performance does not
seem to always occur at the midpoint of the arousal continuum, and
(2) rather than there being a single defined arousal point at which
optimal performance occurs across sporting activities, the best
performance can occur within a small range, or bandwidth, of
arousal level. Further, Hanin proposed that there are positive and
negative emotions (e.g., excited and nervous) that can generate
enhanced performance, just as there are positive and negative
emotions (e.g., comfortable and annoyed) that can debilitate
performance. This proposal is important because it recognizes that
any specific emotion can be positively perceived by one athlete but
negatively perceived by another. In practice, then, athletes can
retrospectively recall the arousal associated with several of their
performances that differ in quality. They can then monitor emotions
and arousal levels before an important match and make adjustments
to increase the chances of falling into this individual ideal zone.
479

FIGURE 9.2 Inverted-U theory and its modifications.
Reprinted by permission from B.D. Hatfield and G.A. Walford, “Understanding Anxiety: Implications for Sport
Performance,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 9 (1987): 60-61.
Catastrophe Theory
According to Hardy (24), assessment of the cognitive and somatic
dimensions of arousal can sharpen the ability to predict (and
therefore control) their impact on performance. Earlier assumptions
associated with the inverted-U theory held that increases in arousal
beyond the optimal level resulted in gradual, proportionate declines
in performance. However, common observation tells us that this is
not always the case—an athlete may suffer a severe and
catastrophic decline rather than a gradual quadratic or curvilinear
480

decline in performance, and restoring a degree of calm does not
necessarily bring a return to the level of performance exhibited
before the decline. In this model, the catastrophe theory, somatic
arousal has a curvilinear, inverted-U relationship to athletic
performance, whereas cognitive anxiety shows a steady negative
relationship to performance. When increases in physiological arousal
occur in the presence of cognitive anxiety, a sudden drop—rather
than a gradual decline—in performance occurs. The practical
implication of this theory is that the arousal constructs need to be
more clearly delineated as cognitive anxiety, physiological arousal,
somatic anxiety, or some combination of these.
Reversal Theory
Kerr’s (30) interpretation of reversal theory posits that the way in
which arousal and anxiety affect performance depends on the
individual’s interpretation of that arousal. Essentially, one athlete
might interpret high levels of arousal as excitement and indicative of
performance readiness, while another athlete, experiencing the
same emotion at the same arousal level, would interpret that feeling
as unpleasant and reflective of a lack of confidence. This idea
implies that athletes have within their power the ability to reverse
their interpretation of their own arousal; instead of perceiving high
arousal as scary and worrisome, they can choose to reverse their
perception and interpret the arousal as reflecting excitement and
anticipation. This theory is important because it emphasizes that
one’s interpretation of arousal, and not just its amount, is significant.
Further, it shows that the way in which arousal and anxiety influence
performance—whether they are beneficial or detrimental to
performance—is within the control of the individual.
481

Motivation
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, motivation is a primary
psychological factor in the acquisition and effective performance of
motor skills. Motivation can be defined as the intensity and
direction of effort (64). Selected aspects of motivational phenomena
are highlighted in the following sections. We first discuss intrinsic
and extrinsic motivation, which greatly influence the athlete’s desire
to train and compete. Then we discuss achievement motivation,
which helps to explain individual differences in competitiveness.
Finally, positive and negative reinforcement are explained as they
apply to skill learning and performance.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation
Intrinsic motivation is important for any athlete. Deci (13)
defined this construct as a desire to be competent and self-
determining. With intrinsic motivation, athletes are driven because of
their love of the game and the inherent reward they feel from
participation. This is motivation that comes from within the athlete
and is exhibited regardless of the existence of material reward or
punishment. Intrinsically motivated athletes focus on the enjoyment
or fun they experience in the activity and generally desire to learn
and improve because of this love for the behavior in and of itself
(64). How can such a desirable state be maintained or encouraged?
The answer lies in Deci’s (13) definition, which stresses success
(competence) and “pulling one’s own strings” (self-determination).
Appropriate goals, especially for training (i.e., process) or
performance (i.e., product), can increase perceived competence.
Additionally, giving the athlete some latitude in decision making
increases perceived self-determination (13). Although authoritarian
behavior is sometimes warranted in sport, in that clear directives are
needed in a stressful and competitive environment, a total lack of
delegated responsibilities could result in a loss of initiative and drive
in athletes (64).
482

In opposition, extrinsic motivation is motivation that comes
from some external as opposed to internal source. Numerous
examples of this exist, because it is founded on an individualized
reward construct; examples of more common extrinsic rewards in
sport settings include awards, trophies, praise from coaches and
teammates, social approval, and fear of punishment. It should be
noted that athletes are rarely completely intrinsically or extrinsically
motivated; rather, they exhibit varying degrees along this motivation
continuum depending on the activity, their perceptions of
competence, the level of importance the activity has, and a host of
other variables (11, 13, 38, 64, 68).
Achievement Motivation
Within the general construct of motivation lies a more specifically
targeted type called achievement motivation, which refers to a
person’s efforts to master a task, achieve excellence, overcome
obstacles, and engage in competition or social comparison. All things
being equal between two athletes, whoever is higher in achievement
motivation will be the better athlete because he or she has a greater
appetite for competition (64).
McClelland and colleagues (38) theorized that all people have
opposing personality traits within themselves: the motive to
achieve success (MAS) and the motive to avoid failure (MAF).
The MAS relates to the capacity to experience pride in one’s
accomplishments and is characterized by a desire to challenge
oneself and evaluate one’s abilities. On the other hand, the MAF
relates to the desire to protect one’s ego and self-esteem. Despite its
name, however, MAF is not really about avoiding failure itself. It is
more about avoiding the perception of shame that accompanies the
failure.
Generally, MAS-dominated athletes are most intrigued by
situations that are either uncertain or challenging, with an
approximate 50% probability of success (64). This creates
opportunities to assess one’s abilities. On the other hand, MAF-
483

dominated players are more comfortable in situations in which it is
either very easy to achieve success (thereby avoiding shame) or so
extremely difficult that there would be no expectation of winning
(again, eliminating the likelihood of feeling shame) (64). At higher
levels of sport involvement, it is unlikely that athletes would be
dominated by MAF, but they would certainly show degrees or a
range of competitiveness. Confronted by a very challenging goal,
such as gaining a significant amount of lean muscle weight during
the hypertrophy phase of a periodized cycle, the MAF-dominated
individual might reduce effort because he or she fears failure and the
threat to self-esteem (and might also claim that the goal is
unrealistic), whereas the MAS-dominated individual might heighten
effort in response to the challenge and not perceive any threat.
Motivational Aspects of Skill Learning
(Self-Controlled Practice)
In addition to providing the individual with information for skill
acquisition, practice, instructions, and feedback can also act as
motivational factors for enhancing performance. Practice schedules
that address the fundamental psychological needs of autonomy,
competence, and social relatedness can influence motivation (73). Of
interest in the motor learning literature is the role of self-
controlled practice in enhancing motivation, performance, and
skill learning. Self-controlled practice involves the athlete in decisions
related to the practice structure, including when to receive feedback
or which skill to practice; it also involves simply asking athletes how
they believe they are doing (10, 11, 12, 73). This promotes a more
active involvement in the practice session and can enhance feelings
of competence and autonomy (11, 12). As a result of this
heightened motivation, performance and learning improve (11, 12).
Engaging the athletes in some decisions related to the practice
schedule is an easy yet effective way to allow them autonomy and
ownership in reaching their sport performance goals. The concepts
484

of instructions, feedback, and practice schedules are discussed in
greater depth later in this chapter.
Positive and Negative Reinforcement in
Coaching
Coaches can also benefit from understanding the concepts of
positive and negative reinforcement and positive and negative
punishment 
as 
they 
relate 
to 
motivation 
(37). 
Positive
reinforcement is the act of increasing the probability of occurrence
of a given behavior (a target behavior, such as correct footwork in
basketball, is termed an operant) by following it with a positive
action, object, or event such as praise, decals on the helmet, or
prizes and awards. Negative reinforcement also increases the
probability of occurrence of a given operant, but it is accomplished
through the removal of an act, object, or event that is typically
aversive. For example, if the team showed great hustle in practice
(i.e., the operant is enthusiasm and hustle), the coach could
announce that no wind sprints would be required at the session’s
end. This coaching reinforcement style focuses attention on what the
athlete is doing correctly.
Punishment, on the other hand, is designed to decrease the
occurrence of a given operant—that is, negative behaviors such as
mistakes or a lack of effort. Positive punishment is the
presentation of an act, object, or event following a behavior that
could 
decrease 
the 
behavior’s 
occurrence. 
An 
example 
is
reprimanding a player after a mistake or making an athlete do push-
ups or sprints after a fumble. Negative punishment, or the
removal of something valued, could take the form of revoking
privileges or playing time, as in benching. Although coaches use a
mixture of both reward and punishment, reinforcement (i.e.,
reward), or a positive approach, is arguably better because it
focuses on what athletes should do and what they did right (termed
specific positive feedback). Reinforcement (both positive and
negative) increases task-relevant focus rather than worry focus. A
485

task-relevant focus facilitates reaction time and decision making.
With reinforcement, athletes also build long-term memories of
success, self-esteem, self-efficacy, and confidence. Successful
experiences more likely color the athlete’s view of competition as
desirable and as an opportunity to perform. Of course, coaches may
punish unwarranted lack of effort, but it seems ineffective to punish
athletes for mistakes if they are making the effort to perform
correctly.
How Should Positive and Negative
Reinforcement Be Applied?
Coaches should generally subscribe to a reinforcement strategy to assist
athletes to focus on what they do correctly.
Punishment should be used sparingly, because it increases the likelihood that
athletes will focus on what they are doing incorrectly.
Under conditions that promote a narrow focus of attention, positive
reinforcement aids a focus on task-relevant cues, while punishment floods
attentional capacity with a predominance of task-irrelevant cues.
486

Attention and Focus
The athlete’s ability to focus can be better understood through the
construct of attention. Attention is defined as the processing of
both external and internal cues that come to awareness. A
performer’s conscious attention is continuously bombarded with a
variety of external stimuli and internal thoughts to which it can be
directed. The ability to inhibit awareness of some stimuli in order to
process others is termed selective attention, and it suppresses
task-irrelevant cues (e.g., people on the sidelines, planes flying over
the stadium) in order to process the task-relevant cues in the limited
attentional space. For a baseball pitcher, task-relevant cues might
include the hitter’s tendencies and the locations of runners on base.
Selective attention, commonly referred to by athletes as
their level of focus, is the suppression of task-irrelevant
stimuli and thoughts.
American football coaches often exploit the strategic potential of
selective attention of their opponents by calling a time-out just
before a field goal attempt. During the time-out, the opposing
athlete might selectively attend more to task-irrelevant thoughts of
self-doubt and the potential for failure, rather than the more
beneficial thoughts of self-reassurance or a focus on minor
instructional cues. Placekickers can deal with this anxiety and
attentional challenge by adopting a ritual or a mental checklist,
commonly referred to as a routine, that consciously directs
thoughts to task-relevant and controllable concerns (e.g., breathing,
checking the turf, and stretching the hamstrings).
The important underlying principle is that thinking one set of
thoughts actively precludes attending to other worrisome thoughts
because of the limited capacity of working memory. This human
shortcoming can be used to advantage. Before a lifting performance,
for example, the athlete might use key phrases to focus on the task-
487

relevant cues associated with the lift, such as foot placement, back
position, point of visual focus, and knee angle during a squat. This
strategy can reduce distractions, which often deter optimal effort.
Such focusing strategies can promote mental consistency during the
preparatory state, which in turn can promote physical consistency—
the hallmark of a skilled athlete.
It is also important to note that the ability to focus attention on
task-relevant cues and to control distraction is a skill that can be
learned and that improves with increased experience. According to
Fitts and Posner’s (17) classic theory, the athlete progresses through
three stages when learning new motor skills. The first stage, termed
the cognitive stage, is characterized by effortful and conscious
regulation of the movement. That is, the athlete has to think about
the details of the task. During the second stage, the associative
stage, the athlete must focus on the task but is less concerned with
the details of the movement. Finally, the athlete achieves the stage
of automaticity, during which the mind is relaxed and the skill is
executed automatically without thinking. Assuming proper instruction
and coaching, the relaxed mind focuses only on what is relevant to
the task at that moment and, at the same time, automatically filters
out all irrelevant cues. Attaining automaticity of action and the clarity
of thought that often accompanies it is a goal for many athletes.
Attentional Styles
Nideffer (41) formulated an important concept in sport psychology
when he theorized that individuals tend to experience shifting
categories of attentional styles during performance. These categories
are characterized by two dimensions: direction (internal–external)
and width (broad–narrow). The first dimension refers to an
introspective versus an externally oriented perspective, whereas the
second dimension refers to an integrative (expansive) versus a
highly selective orientation. These dimensions each occur on
overlapping continuums, creating four quadrants of attentional
focus: broad external, in which the athlete assesses the situation by
488

looking at the environment and various elements within it; broad
internal, in which the athlete processes information and develops a
strategy; narrow internal, in which the athlete mentally rehearses
the upcoming action; and narrow external, in which the athlete
specifically focuses on one or two external cues to generate action.
These constructs and their relationships to each other can be seen in
figure 9.3.
FIGURE 9.3 Four quadrants of attentional focus.
Adapted from Nideffer (1976).
Understanding 
attentional 
styles 
can 
improve 
coaching
effectiveness. For example, an athlete who tends to become
overloaded with external stimuli might be coached to focus on one
important cue, such as an opponent’s footwork. Athletes who seem
to get lost in their own head could practice describing out loud, to a
coach, what they are feeling during a lunge. Without such coaching,
these players would likely attend to inappropriate cues and react too
slowly.
489

Psychological Techniques for Improved
Performance
Improving one’s use of mental skills can enhance performance on
sporting courts, in training rooms, and on practice fields; it can also
transfer to better performance in all areas of life. These
psychological skills are quite similar to physical, technical, and
tactical skills in that they can be taught and learned and must be
practiced on a regular basis if they are to generate long-term
behavioral change. This next section introduces several of these
psychological skills that can be integrated into training to improve
overall performance.
Relaxation Techniques to Control Elevated
Arousal and Anxiety
Several techniques can be used to help athletes manage their
psychological processes through relaxation. Relaxation techniques
are designed to reduce physiological arousal and increase task-
relevant focus. These techniques are important when people are
executing complex tasks or practicing new ones, when they are
dealing with pressure situations, or when deliberate focus is
necessary.
Diaphragmatic Breathing
One simple technique for reaching a higher level of physical and
mental relaxation is diaphragmatic breathing (63). Referred to as
belly breathing, this form of breathing is a basic stress management
technique and a precursor to virtually all other mental training
techniques. It focuses attention on the process of breathing to clear
the mind and therefore increase concentration. During any mental
training exercise, athletes should attempt to engage in deep,
rhythmic breathing in a relaxed, natural manner. Physiologically, this
form of breathing has a major influence on decreasing heart rate
490

and muscle tension due to feedback mechanisms that link the
respiratory and cardiac control centers in the brain stem. The
relatively deep inspiration, followed by a controlled expiration, alters
autonomic 
nervous 
system 
(ANS) 
balance 
to 
emphasize
parasympathetic neural activity and vagal tone (44). The
parasympathetic branch of the ANS promotes the opposite effect of
the sympathetic-mediated fight-or-flight response. Thus, rhythmic
breathing can decrease neural stimulation of both the skeletal
muscles and organs (e.g., heart, lungs, liver), resulting in a sense of
deep relaxation.
Diaphragmatic breathing requires that attention be directed to the
abdominal region. It is best to get familiar with this starting from a
standing position so that breathing is not inhibited. The athlete
should let the arms hang loosely and concentrate on relaxing,
particularly in the neck and shoulder region, by first taking a couple
of deep breaths. Next, the athlete should relax the abdominal
muscles so that they appear flaccid. The initiation of each breath
should occur simultaneously with the relaxed protrusion of the
abdomen; placing a hand on the abdomen gives feedback to ensure
that the abdomen protrudes with the initiation of each breath. With
each breath the abdomen should become naturally distended. When
this portion of the technique is performed properly, the diaphragm (a
muscle at the base of the lungs) contracts and drops, allowing a
deeper breath to occur. This is the first stage of taking a maximal
inhalation. The entire process of inhalation takes place in three
different areas and stages: the lower abdomen, the mid-chest, and
finally the upper chest. Diaphragmatic breathing can be combined
with more dynamic muscular relaxation techniques like progressive
muscular relaxation and autogenic training.
Progressive Muscular Relaxation
To achieve an appropriate level of cognitive and somatic activation
before performance, athletes may employ progressive muscle
relaxation (PMR) (28). Progressive muscle relaxation is a
491

technique by which psychological and physical arousal are self-
regulated through the control of skeletal muscle tension. In essence,
by going through a series of alternating muscular tensing and
relaxing phases, the athlete learns to become aware of somatic
tension and thereby control it. The hope is that a relaxed body will
promote a relaxed mind.
These tensing and relaxing cycles progress from one muscle
group to the next until all muscle groups are optimally relaxed. Each
cycle involves maximally tensing each muscle for a short period of
time (10-15 s), followed by a conscious attempt to relax that muscle
completely, before moving on to the next muscle group. With
practice, an athlete learns to rapidly discern the difference between
a tense muscle and a relaxed one and then actively take steps to
generate the needed muscular relaxation.
In many cases, a positive side effect of the reduced muscle
tension is an increase in smooth, fluid, or efficient movement as well
as an increased range of motion around the joint. This can be an
effective self-regulation technique for some athletes before practice
or competition, or even during an intense moment in a given
contest. Therefore, athletes should practice this technique in the
days leading up to competition (rather than on the day of) to
determine its individual impact.
Autogenic Training
For athletes who are injured or who for some reason find it
uncomfortable or impractical to experience high muscular tension
levels, the PMR cycle for each muscle group can be replaced with an
attentional state that simply focuses on the sense of warmth and
heaviness for a particular limb or muscle group. This technique,
referred to as autogenic training, consists of a series of exercises
designed to produce physical sensations in the body—generally
warmth and heaviness (64). Because autogenic training eliminates
the need for uncomfortable levels of muscle tension in the
contraction–relaxation 
cycles, 
older 
athletes 
or 
athletes 
in
492

rehabilitation from injury may find this an attractive alternative to
PMR.
Relaxation 
techniques 
are 
designed 
to 
reduce
physiological arousal and increase task-relevant focus.
These techniques are of extreme importance when one
is executing complex or novel tasks or performing in
high-pressure situations.
Systematic Desensitization
Sometimes fears are learned by association of previously neutral
stimuli with a stressful event. For example, an adult non-swimmer
who experienced a threatening event in the water as a child may
avoid activities around water because of a learned association. This
individual may become fearful and therefore tense doing basic
resistance or stretching exercises in a pool, even ones that require
no swimming skill. This example illustrates the importance of
understanding 
exercise 
science. 
For 
example, 
the 
aquatic
environment is a great aid in enhancing flexibility. To benefit
maximally from a stretching program, however, a participant must
learn to fully relax. If the purpose of the pool session is to enhance
flexibility, the inability of a non-swimmer to relax in the environment
could easily prevent gains in flexibility.
One technique that helps an athlete initially confront or reduce
fear is systematic desensitization (SD) (71). Systematic
desensitization combines mental and physical techniques that allow
an athlete to replace a fear response to various cues with a
relaxation response. Like cognitive–affective stress management
training (SMT) and stress inoculation training (SIT), systematic
desensitization teaches the athlete to use a specific relaxation skill-
based coping response to control for cognitive arousal (64). This
adaptive, learned replacement process, the principle behind SD, is
called counterconditioning.
493

To practice the technique, an athlete should be reasonably skilled
at both PMR and mental imagery. The athlete should construct a
hierarchy, or progression, of events and situations that he or she
specifically perceives as fearful. For example, a competitive gymnast
who suffered a serious injury on the balance beam may list a series
of fearful scenes, proceeding from warming up before the event to
the actual movement that precipitated the injury.
In a relaxed setting the athlete visualizes the first scene and
experiences a mild degree of anxiety. At the same time,
diaphragmatic breathing, PMR, or another physical relaxation
technique is instituted, and a strong relaxation response theoretically
should overcome the relatively weak fight-or-flight syndrome. This
technique is practiced until the athlete can hold the image clearly
while maintaining a relaxed state. The athlete progresses through
the hierarchy, experiencing conditioned fear in small, manageable
doses that are overcome by the relaxation achieved with the
relaxation technique. This procedure prevents cognitive avoidance
and counterconditions a new response (i.e., relaxation) to the
formerly fear-inducing stimuli (64).
How Should Athletes Use Arousal Control
Techniques?
An athlete should employ arousal reduction techniques when performing a
new skill or one that is complex or when performing in high-pressure
situations.
Athletes should employ arousal enhancement techniques when executing
simple skills, ones that are well learned, or in situations of minimal pressure.
The purpose of employing such techniques is to allow the athlete to perform
with an unburdened mind while matching his or her mental and physical
intensity to the demands of the task.
Imagery
Imagery is a cognitive skill in which the athlete creates or re-
creates an experience in his or her mind (64). Ideally, for athletes, it
494

uses all the senses to create a mental experience of an athletic
performance. The athlete simulates reality by mentally rehearsing a
movement, imagining visual, auditory, kinesthetic, olfactory, and
even gustatory (taste) cues. Feltz and Landers (16) provided
convincing evidence for the effectiveness of mental imagery in the
enhancement of sport skill based on a meta-analytic review of the
literature. During the initial stages of using imagery, the athlete may
start with a relatively simple, somewhat familiar visual image. This
helps successful practice of the technique. As with learning any skill
by proceeding from simple to complex, the person starts with static
images, such as visualizing a golf ball or mentally examining the
visual characteristics of a tennis racket. The vividness or detail of the
image should become clearer and clearer with continued practice.
Some people have a natural talent for achieving image clarity, but
everyone can improve with repeated practice.
The perspective of the image can be internal (first person) or
external (third person). Although the research literature is unclear as
to whether one is superior, it seems that an image that is more
engaging and natural to the athlete would be most appropriate. Of
course, the internal, first-person perspective seems more specific to
skill execution, inasmuch as the actual task is performed with such
an orientation. However, because many athletes are familiar with
reviewing film or recordings of their performances, an external
perspective may also feel natural.
After the athlete successfully visualizes a stationary object with
vivid detail, he or she may start to move the object or begin to walk
around it in the mind, viewing it from a number of different
perspectives. For an image such as a basketball, the athlete may
attempt to bounce the ball and feel it against the fingertips. In this
manner, the athlete increases complexity by controlling the image or
moving it with control (e.g., bouncing the ball) and by bringing a
multisensory perspective to bear (i.e., using tactile or kinesthetic as
well as visual sensation).
495

Rehearsing successful execution of a skill during imagined
competitive conditions can provide the subconscious mind with
positive memories, thus increasing the athlete’s sense of confidence
and preparedness for the particular sport. Of course, mental imaging
is not as powerful a determinant of self-efficacy as actual success,
but it does offer two potentially potent ingredients. First, successful
performance is entirely under the control of the athlete during
imaging, whereas a degree of uncertainty about the outcome is
inherent in reality. In imagery the athlete has a great opportunity to
experience success. We believe that athletes should be realistic in
the kinds of success they imagine; that is, the mental images should
be personally challenging yet within the realm of possibility. Second,
the athlete can experience competition repeatedly, fostering a sense
of familiarity and preparedness.
For some athletes, the months of preparation for a season of play
—involving off-season, preseason, and in-season conditioning and
skill development—may lead to only a few minutes of actual
competitive experience. Even for the starters in team sports, actual
competitive experience may be extremely small relative to physical
practice time. Mental imagery, however, allows the athlete to get
used to this uncertain environment over longer periods of time
despite minimal real-world competitive opportunity.
Self-Efficacy
Of course, one of the main objectives for applied sport psychology is
generating a psychological perspective that improves performance,
and it has been argued that perceived self-confidence, or self-
efficacy (1), is a better predictor of task execution than either
arousal or anxiety. Self-confidence is the belief that one can
successfully perform a desired behavior (64), while self-efficacy, a
situationally specific form of self-confidence, is the perception of
one’s ability to perform a given task in a specific situation (4).
Someone who is highly self-efficacious does not doubt his or her
ability to succeed at a given task, even when failure is experienced.
496

According to Bandura’s theory (4), a person’s self-efficacy is
derived from a number of sources:
Performance accomplishments—past experiences of success or
failure
Vicarious experiences—watching others (modeling)
Verbal persuasion—encouragement from self or others
Imaginal experience—using imagery to see oneself perform
Physiological states—perception of arousal as facilitative or
debilitative
Emotional states—affect or mood
These sources translate well into sport and training environments
and can be influenced by the coaches as well as the athlete
themselves.
It is thought that if an athlete has the necessary skill set and an
acceptable level of motivation, the resulting performance is largely
determined by self-efficacy (4). Skill alone is not enough to ensure
effective performance—athletes have to want to perform well and
need to believe they can be successful in their endeavors.
Furthermore, individuals’ level of self-efficacy influences the choices
made—whether toward certain activities that they feel confident
about or away from those about which confidence is lacking.
Similarly, this construct additionally influences level of overall effort
as well as persistence in the face of obstacles, because those who
believe in themselves generally work harder and are more
determined to attain the desired outcome than those without the
necessary levels of self-efficacy (64). Clearly, the perception of one’s
ability to successfully perform the tasks of sport or training has a
direct impact on the actual performance.
Self-efficacy influences people’s choice of activity, their
level of effort in that activity, and how much persistence
they will have in the face of challenging obstacles.
497

Self-Talk
A technique frequently used to enhance self-efficacy, aid in directing
proper focus, assist in regulating arousal levels, and reinforce
motivation is self-talk. Self-talk, or intrapersonal communication, is
the inner dialogue we have with ourselves (64). It is what we say to
ourselves, either out loud or in our heads, that provides the
soundtrack for our behaviors and performances.
Self-talk is generally categorized as positive, negative, or
instructional and can be either spontaneously generated or more
purposefully used to generate changes in mood or behaviors (61).
Positive self-talk can include utterances or statements that are
encouraging (e.g., “Come on!”), motivational (e.g., “I can do this!”),
or reinforcing (e.g., “I am ready!”) and generally reflects favorable
emotions or feelings. Negative self-talk generally reflects anger,
discouragement, doubt, or negative judgment (e.g., “You suck!” “You
can’t do this.” “What were you thinking?”). Instructional self-talk
generally provides specific direction or focus on necessary
performance cues for a particular skill or strategy (e.g., “Feet
shoulder-width apart.” “Keep your torso erect.”).
Positive and instructionally focused self-talk have been found to
improve performance in laboratory settings; however, significant
individual and environmental differences may modify these findings
in actual performance settings (61). For example, instructional self-
talk can be harmful for expert performers, because relaying specific
performance cues may actively interfere with the automaticity of the
movement. Furthermore, some evidence exists that positive self-talk
can result in decreased self-efficacy in some performers (72).
Generally, however, negative self-talk is associated with poor
performance, because it directs one’s focus to inappropriate cues,
can trigger negative emotional energy, and can decrease confidence.
Therefore, in order to employ self-talk most effectively, athletes
should begin by examining their current use of self-talk and its
effects on performance. Then, an assessment of the most
appropriate way to modify their self-talk can be made.
498

Goal Setting
Not surprisingly, many of the concepts discussed in this chapter can
have a direct influence on one another. Self-efficacy is one of these
in that it has a significant impact on the types of goals people set for
themselves. Those with higher confidence and efficacy generally
envision, create, and strive to accomplish more challenging goals.
Goal setting can be characterized as a process whereby
progressively challenging standards of performance are pursued with
a defined criterion of task performance that increases the likelihood
of perceived success (35). For example, a goal for a swimmer may
be to execute a technically correct stroke throughout a sanctioned
distance, such as the 50-meter freestyle. In the beginning, the
swimmer’s skill level might be so low that such a task would seem
overwhelming and produce a strong sense of failure and frustration,
yet physiological testing may show the coach that the athlete has
the physical resources to excel at such an event (i.e., the swimmer
has a high degree of fast-twitch, or type II, muscle fibers, exhibits
superior muscular power or speed-strength in the upper and lower
body, and seems to have a high capacity for anaerobic metabolism).
However, the stroke mechanics are inefficient; the athlete is highly
aware of this and therefore lacks confidence. First, the coach and
athlete can break the skill and conditioning units down into
manageable components (the traditional whole–part–whole method
of learning). Then as the athlete focuses on and masters each
component, a sense of progress and success is nurtured, developing
more confidence and better motivating the athlete to complete the
challenging goal.
Systematic goal setting can simultaneously increase the
psychological development and performance of the athlete (64). A
number of reasons explain why goal setting affects performance:
Goals direct an athlete’s attention by prioritizing efforts.
Goals increase effort because of the contingency of success on
goal attainment.
499

Goals increase positive reinforcement through the feedback
given to athletes.
It seems that the informational nature of thoughtfully derived goals,
which increase effort because they are challenging yet attainable, is
a powerful ingredient in behavioral change.
Process Goals
An important distinction related to setting goals is the difference
between the process versus the outcome (8). Process goals are
those over whose achievement the athlete has control. They focus
on the actions the individual must engage in during performance to
execute the skill well. If the effort is expended, success occurs with
a relatively high degree of probability. Examples of process goals
within the skill domain relate to form and technique, although an
individually determined time (in the case of a swimmer or track
athlete) could also be considered a process goal. An example of a
process goal within strength and conditioning is to have the athlete
focus on the strategy for weight reduction (e.g., what the athlete
must do on a daily basis, such as aerobic activity and dietary
modifications) rather than on the actual result (e.g., a loss of
weight), thereby increasing a sense of control over actions. With
process goals, success is strongly contingent on effort.
Outcome Goals
On the other hand, outcome goals are ones over which the athlete
has little control; typically, winning is the primary focus. Outcome
goals in sport generally focus on the competitive result of an event,
so earning a medal, scoring points, and generating a high ranking
would all fall in this category. The accomplishment of outcome goals
is contingent not only on individual effort but also on the efforts and
abilities of others—something out of the individual’s personal control.
We believe that winning is a sound goal orientation that can surely
generate high levels of motivation but that, ironically, an athlete can
increase the likelihood of its achievement by having both a process
500

and an outcome goal orientation as opposed to a winning-only
attitude. Undue emphasis on winning alone may occupy such a
proportion of fixed attentional capacity that it causes narrowing of
attentional focus. As such, task-relevant cues are missed, reaction
time is slowed, and coordination is diminished by forced movements
and 
compromised 
automaticity, 
which 
alter 
neuromuscular
sequencing—all inhibiting the attainment of the desired goal.
Both process and outcome goals can be applied to strength and
conditioning settings as well. For example, emphasizing technique
during the power clean illustrates a process orientation, whereas
focusing only on completing the set illustrates an outcome
orientation. An exception to the general caveat about avoiding
outcome goals is the situation in which an athlete is extremely
confident and undermatched in competition. He or she may want to
focus solely on outcome and a personal best to maximize motivation.
Short-Term Goals
In addition to the process and outcome distinction just discussed,
goals can also be categorized as short-term and long-term. Short-
term goals are generally those that are directly related to current
training or competition and are guidelines that can be attained in a
relatively short time frame. Short-term goals also increase the
likelihood of success because, although challenging, they are
relatively close to the athlete’s present ability level. They also
increase confidence, self-efficacy, and motivation because of the
likelihood of success. In this regard, short-term process and outcome
goals counteract the boredom and frustration that are potential side
effects of long, arduous training regimens.
Long-Term Goals
However, the full meaning of the short-term standards of success is
framed by an appropriate long-term goal. Long-term goals are
those that overarch the series of linked short-term goals. The
attainment of those short-term goals should lead to the
501

accomplishment of the related long-term goal. The athlete may see
more relevance in everyday practice goals if it is apparent how they
help attain the ultimate level of performance. For example, a
gymnast who has a long-term goal of winning the floor routine for
the national championship during her senior year may be much more
intense and positive about weight room conditioning exercises when
she perceives their relevance to her dream. An athlete may be more
aroused psychologically and physiologically during practice by the
perception that today’s activity is another step on the ladder to a
personal, long-term dream.
Finally, the specificity of the goals—whether short- or long-term—
is important in relation to giving the athlete feedback in effective
coaching. Feedback, or the knowledge of success and failure, is
more effective in the presence of specific, quantifiable goals, as
opposed to vague standards of performance. Feedback is a
corrective mechanism, like a thermostat or cybernetic device. Both
success and failure can help the athlete stay on course toward long-
term success. For example, a specific goal of 25 minutes of
continuous running in a heart rate range of 160 to 170 beats/min is
a much more engaging objective than “going out for a run.” The
vague phrasing may be fine for a recreational participant, but it is
not helpful for a competitive cross-country runner, especially when
the goal is to develop physiological capacity.
Optimal goal setting requires knowledge of the exercise sciences
in both the biophysical and behavioral domains. The efficacy of goals
for improving athletic performance lies in their relevance to the
physical needs of the athlete. For example, formulating a series of
appropriate goals to enable a 400-meter runner to decrease his or
her time in the event rests on understanding the physical profile,
relevant metabolic pathways, and biomechanical technique to be
developed.
Of course, some goals may be completely psychological and
therefore only indirectly performance based. An example of such a
goal is to adopt a positive mood state for an entire practice.
502

Although such goals demand less biophysical knowledge, they may
be profoundly useful in increasing performance because they are
goals that an athlete has tremendous control over and can facilitate
inhibiting 
habitual 
negative 
self-talk. 
However, 
the 
most
comprehensive goal-setting programs encompass several areas of
exercise science in that they might involve goals from any number of
subdisciplines, including physiological, metabolic, biomechanical,
nutrition, and psychological. This requirement uniquely distinguishes
sport psychology from other behavioral sciences.
In general, guidelines for goal setting include the following:
Long-term goals and short-term goals are interdependent.
Long-term goals provide a sense of meaningfulness and
direction for pursuing short-term goals.
The attainment of short-term goals provides a hierarchical
sense of mastery and success that builds self-confidence.
Athletes should define process goals to focus on elements of
their performance over which they have control.
Yips, Choking, Flow, and Clutch
Often coaches struggle with helping athletes with being less anxious when they
compete. Anxiety can interfere with fluid movement patterns. This is known as the
yips, the twisties, or, during critical moments, choking. The more technical term is
focal dystonia.
Simone Biles describes her twisties as a moment when she started thinking and
lost air awareness and proprioception as she rotated during a gymnastics
competition (58a). “If I still had my air awareness, and I just was having a bad
day, I would have continued.… But it was more than that.… It’s so dangerous.…
It’s a miracle I landed on my feet.… As soon as I landed that vault, I went and told
my coach that I cannot continue.” She expressed a deficit mental focus that
created spatial disorientation. Rick Ankiel describes this during his Major League
Baseball pitching career like this: “I was pitching with fear … That put me into a
freeze mindset, and that’s what led to the yips.” Closely related but distinct,
choking is when focal dystonia happens during a critical time during performance
execution.
Researchers have suggested that perfectionism, social comparison, and dystonia
are associated with choking. Opposed to this experience is the positive emotional
state of flow. Athletes describe flow as effortless movement, complete trust in
503

movements, and remarkable self-control. Caitlin Clark, a basketball player formerly
of the University of Iowa, has said, “It’s not about last year. You worry too much
about the past, you’re going to get caught up in that. It’s about being present.
Being where your feet are.… Be in this moment.” When this happens during critical
times during a training session or sport, it is considered clutch. Purposeful focus,
optimal emotional control, and high effort describes clutch performances and is
often unpleasant during the event. Several stress management techniques can be
employed to help work toward flow and clutch, including rhythmic breathing,
attentional cuing, and presence-centered focus. However, the yips and choking
have been linked to the physiological states of fight-or-flight and, in some case,
trauma. Fight-or-flight refers to the physiological response of perception of threat
that readies the body to defend vigorously or run away. Thus, if athletes are
experiencing these issues, professional support is warranted.
504

Mental Health and Strength and
Conditioning
Mental health is emerging as an important topic for strength and
conditioning professionals. Research published related to mental
health and athletes has accelerated from roughly 74 publications in
2003 to over 1,100 in 2023. This growth demonstrates increased
interest in the topic, but research outcomes support the need to
focus on building competence in strength and conditioning because
mental health affects performance (24, 62). In a study, student-
athletes were at risk for depression (22.3%), anxiety (12.5%), and
low self-esteem (8%) (62). While most research has reported higher
rates of positive mental health for athletes compared to nonathletes,
training for and playing sports are stressful (31, 47). Some of the
stressors include burnout from long hours of training; social identity
pressure to perform well; and meeting high expectations from
coaches, teammates, and self while attempting to compete with
other athletes. These stressors can affect mental health and hygiene
that can appear at subclinical levels in student-athletes.
What is mental health? Defining mental health encompasses
emotional, psychological, and social well-being (5, 47, 62). Also,
mental health is not just the absence of a mental illness. Challenges
to mental health are often detected when sport, training, and life
challenges disrupt normal self-care behavior. Coaches working with
athletes will have varied backgrounds related to psychological
distress identification and mental health management. Some
practical parameters for coaching education related to mental health
issues are needed.
Strength and conditioning professionals can observe signs and
symptoms of changing mental health in athletes. While striving to
enhance performance, a holistic athlete monitoring program can
address self-care, recovery, and optimization of psychological,
behavioral, and emotional factors (5).
505

Strength and conditioning professionals can view psychological
distress in many ways. One method is for coaches to document
issues in mental health through identifying signs and symptoms
(table 9.1). Signs are observable outcomes that can be readily
assessed by the coach. For instance, a sign of depression is the
lessening of effort observed by the coach. Symptoms are usually
self-reported feelings or sensations. The symptoms would be the
athlete reporting that he or she feels tired or has less power.
TABLE 9.1 Signs and Symptoms of Anxiety,
Depression, and Stress
Signs
Symptoms
Distinctive factors
Anxiety
Rapid eye
movement
Rapid speech
Sweating
Racing heart rate
Shaking or
tapping with
fingers or toes
Sleep problems
Feeling restless, wound
up, on edge, or irritable
Easily fatigued
Difficulty concentrating
Gastrointestinal somatic
symptoms
Difficulty controlling
feelings of worry
Feelings of impending
doom or being out of
control
Feeling self-conscious or
avoiding situations
Circular thinking,
rumination, worry
Depression
Depressed mood
Sleep disruption
Decreased
movement or
coordination
Agitation
Social isolation
Change in appetite
Feelings of guilt
Gastrointestinal somatic
symptoms
Hypochondriasis
Rumination about the
past
Low energy or mood,
hopelessness, and
helplessness
Stress
Racing heart rate
Agitation
Sleep disturbance
Concerns about meeting
high standards
Concerns about social
obligations
Urgency or heightened
arousal
Adapted from Beisecker et al. (2024); Gustavson et al. (2018); Knowles et al. (2021);
Rogers et al. (2024); Weber et al. (2023).
506

Signs
Symptoms
Distinctive factors
Inability to
recover
Appetite changes
Impulsive decision
making
Concerns about wasting
time
Concerns about weight
Trouble making
decisions
Trouble relaxing
Being lonely
Adapted from Beisecker et al. (2024); Gustavson et al. (2018); Knowles et al. (2021);
Rogers et al. (2024); Weber et al. (2023).
A clear understanding of similarities and differences between
mental states can be useful. It is important to note that several
nuances of anxiety exist and can include general anxiety disorder,
social anxiety, panic disorders, and phobias. Anxiety often presents
as a circular pattern of thoughts and feelings of heightened
importance known as ruminations and worry. Some predisposing
factors for anxiety include large social and schedule adjustments, a
biological family history of anxiety, negative life events, early trauma,
and shyness in childhood (6, 62). Lists of signs and symptoms of
anxiety, depression, and stress in athletes are in table 9.1. These
manifest in varied somatic, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms.
Often maladaptive coping and perceptions of impending outcomes or
doom fill the individual with urgency, overwhelming feelings of
dread, and focus on negative consequences. By the end of this
section, strength and conditioning professionals will be able to
identify signs and symptoms of anxiety, depression, and stress;
recognize the appropriate means of support; and develop an
appreciation of the impact of mental health on performance and
injury risk.
Depression and anxiety can share signs and symptoms. These
include agitation, somatic complaints (e.g., stomach aches or sweaty
palms), restlessness, social withdrawal, difficulty thinking, and sleep
disturbance. These represent cognitive processing biases that can
lead to rumination and worry (26). What sets depression apart is
507

anhedonia 
(lack 
of 
emotion), 
feelings 
of 
hopelessness 
or
helplessness, and low energy (26). Studies have identified that
depression can begin with poor performance, injury, concussion,
social comparisons, high expectations, and changes in social or
playing status (26, 31). Also affecting depression are changes in
feedback from coaches, behavioral deactivation, negative self-
perceptions, 
evaluations, 
and 
feelings 
of 
helplessness 
or
hopelessness. Stress is an imbalance between the demands of a task
or situation and the ability to cope with the challenge, as stated
earlier in this chapter. Chronic stress often interferes with sleep,
mood, and self-care habits. Because mental stress is unique to each
individual, it has many signs and symptoms. The most recognizable
signs of stress include urgency, agitation, and hurried speech.
Now that these states have been identified, how do coaches help
athletes get the appropriate support? One helpful way is a three-
step process that follows the content of Weinberg and Gould (64)
while adding the assessment of duration and disruption from more
traditional psychological evaluation. First, identify the signs and
symptoms of distress related to affect, behavior, and cognitions.
Second, determine the duration of distress (lasting greater than 2-3
weeks) and potential disruption (e.g., sleep patterns, nutritional
habits, social relationships). Specifically, is the distress temporary or
persistent, and how will it affect behaviors outside of sports? Third,
determine how to support the athlete. A question could follow: Is it
important to refer the athlete for more support, allow the athlete
time for self-reflection, or collaborate with the athlete to work on
centering or environmental management to change disruptive
performance-related responses?
The first step in identifying psychological signs of distress is
classifying the affect, behavior, and cognitions (ABCs) observed in
athletes (11, 64, 65). Affect refers to the mood and emotions seen in
and reported by the athlete. For instance, an athlete might look
anxious, have a stressed face, report feeling hopeless, or have a
persistent negative expression. Behavior refers to movements like
508

nervous pacing, fidgeting, slow reactions, and rapid eye tracking.
Cognitions 
are 
thoughts 
reported, 
negative 
worry 
about
performances or outcomes, overgeneralizing, catastrophizing, and
doubts about abilities or past failures. A brief review of cognitions
that can disrupt performances are all-or-nothing thinking, jumping to
conclusions, magnification, minimization, emotional reasoning, and
confirmation bias (5, 22).
Once these signs are observed, step 2 is to determine if the issue
is temporary or persistent. To determine what level of help is
required for an athlete, coaches need to learn how the signs and
symptoms of distress affect performance and when and how to refer
to a professional who is trained to handle psychological distress.
This third step, referral to a qualified support professional,
requires the coach to work in an individual setting with the athlete to
develop a plan to refer to a support professional, who should be
consulted or contacted ahead of time. This remains a key skill to
assist athletes with self-care for mental health and as an important
step for coaches. A performance coach or consultant is trained in
implementing psychological skills that are attention based and do
not enter into interpersonal or clinical issues. For example, a
performance coach or consultant (usually certified through the
Association of Applied Sport Psychology as a certified mental
performance consultant [CMPC]) employs goal setting, imagery, self-
talk, attentional focus, or other psychological skills to direct effort
and attention. A counselor is licensed by the state and is usually
trained to help with interpersonal, cultural, and mental health issues.
For example, if an athlete needs a counselor, interpersonal and self-
care can become a focus of cognitive behavioral treatment. Also
licensed by the state, a psychologist is trained to administer
psychological testing batteries, focusing on interpersonal and self-
care issues to work with chronic mental health issues.
The Mental Health Case Studies sidebar discusses different issues
coaches encounter and highlights the referral process. When issues
relate to performance of low motivation and effort, coaching cues
509

are often given. However, when the athlete demonstrates persistent
(two to three weeks) negative affect, cognition, or behaviors,
referral for more support to a counselor or psychologist may be
needed. Also, if the behavior becomes disruptive to other teammates
or training partners, the coach is tasked with assessing the situation,
making a judgment related to management of the athlete’s behavior,
and deciding how best to address or support the athlete toward
positive behaviors.
In the future, challenges to mental health in athletics could also
come from social media; name, image, and likeness (NIL); and
temporary commitments or lack of identification with a program
facilitated by the college transfer portal. Thus, a higher level of social
comparison and self-esteem challenges will likely be stressors for
athletes. Imperative to the preparation for future strength and
conditioning professionals will be skill building and resources related
to these emerging challenges.
When subclinical anxiety, depression, or stress are seen by the
coach, a plan can be made to change behavior, team environment,
and emotional management. Subclinical issues include low-level and
short-term mental or emotional distress that are not serious enough
to affect athletes’ personal, academic, and social roles. These often
do not last longer than a week and do not disrupt sleep, eating, and
social functioning. However, when persistent issues or disruptions
become more chronic and severe, a professional referral to a mental
health specialist is clearly warranted. When more chronic issues
arise, the coach should seek support of the sports medicine staff
(e.g., athletic trainers, nutritionists, team physicians) as well as the
mental health community in a respectful way (maintaining
confidentiality, dignity, and communication with the athlete), so
prioritizing mental well-being is the first goal. By developing a
reference list of professionals in the school, surrounding community,
or athletic department, the strength and conditioning professional
can be better prepared for mental health issues should they arise.
510

Social norms and the environment should be considered when
helping an athlete seek mental health support. Athletes in team
sports may wish to have privacy while getting support. Because
social stigmas and mental health treatment can sometimes clash,
the strength and conditioning professional should attempt to be
aware of individual preferences and readiness for support. Not all
mental health issues are covered in this chapter (e.g., substance
abuse, eating disorders, bullying or hazing, body dysmorphia,
gender identity, social phobias, and trauma) so further education is
recommended for strength and conditioning professionals as they
work with diverse populations of athletes.
Mental Health Case Studies
The strength and conditioning professional can use the list of signs and symptoms
of anxiety, depression, and stress found in table 9.1 (page 182) to frame how each
athlete is feeling (step 1), then determine how long and how critical those signs
and symptoms are to the athlete (step 2), and decide a course of action to refer
the athlete to the appropriate support professional (step 3).
Case Study 1
Tanner has been swimming all summer and feels tired and demotivated. He is a
high school junior, ready for his senior year, and feels like his friends are too busy
to spend time with him. This has lasted for one week. He reports that no matter
how hard he tries, he cannot get better. During workouts he reports not wanting to
swim anymore. His workout effort is decreasing, but he still completes all sets. He
paces in the water between sets and looks uncomfortable. Socially, he has not
been talking to his friends during workouts but reports a good social life outside of
the strength and conditioning programming.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Pacing, reduced effort, lack of social interactions during the workouts, and
decreased effort and motivation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One week in duration, not affecting things outside of sport
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consultant
Case Study 2
511

Jenny has been training to get better at volleyball but on her college team has
good competition. She nervously fidgets with her hands before drills and often
reacts without concerns for form or accuracy. Also, she will storm out of the gym
when her emotions get the best of her. This has been occurring for three months.
She is a dedicated athlete in the strength program. Often she feels less talented
compared to her peers and pushes herself to prove everyone wrong about her
nonscholarship status. At night, she often worries about her choices, her ability,
and her friendships. This has caused her to lose sleep, averaging about three to
four hours a night. She also starts missing workouts due to oversleeping and
performs poorly in coordination drills. When approached about her effort, she gets
defensive and leaves training.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Fidgets and storms out of the gym, missing workouts, oversleeping
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Three months; it seems to be disrupting other aspects of her life such as social
relationships or sleep
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor
Case Study 3
Meisha is a 15-year-old softball player who is very outgoing. She is happy but can
be too intense for her teammates. They report her mood as very aggressive and
confrontational. This has been an issue for the last month. Wanting attention,
Meisha often wants to talk about leading drills, wants to be the first in line, and
talks loudly. Her relationships, sleep, and self-care seem good, but lately friends
have started to call her less. She wants to learn more about goal setting and self-
talk so she can get stronger in the off-season. Coaches report several girls on the
team have reported that her mood is creating an issue on the team such that
teammates are starting to feel uncomfortable. Meisha reports feeling socially
isolated and sad about this development.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Loud talking, aggressive, feeling uncomfortable with being socially disengaged
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One month, socially disruptive, not affecting behavior outside of sports
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consultant
Case Study 4
Alex is a high school senior who cannot seem to find his position on the soccer
team. His mood keeps getting worse. This has been happening for the last six
512

weeks. His friends are worried about his continued drop in mood, and he has
started missing school. When asked about his motivation and plans for soccer, he
says he has no idea and he does not really care anymore. It is clear he is starting
to get worse with his self-care, and he stops shaving. His friends have noticed him
vaping after school, and he is starting to fall behind during running drills. Recently,
his teammates have tried to help but are starting to get worried.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Missing practices and school, mood, and decreased motivation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Six weeks, disrupting social relationships and self-care
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor or psychologist
513

Psychological Impact of Injury in Sport
To enhance athletic performance and decrease the risk and severity
of future injury, strength and conditioning professionals need to build
some basic skills. Injuries are challenging setbacks many athletes
face during their careers (39). Whether athletes work through a
minor setback (e.g., a muscle strain or adjusting to a new season) or
a career-ending injury, the impact on an athlete’s psychological
health and performance is significantly affected. Among the
cognitive responses, athletes may experience recurrent intrusive
thoughts, decreased self-esteem, and lowered athletic identity
(identification and self-worth from sport participation) (14).
Additionally, an athlete’s emotional response will vary throughout the
injury rehabilitation process. They will feel a spectrum of negative
emotions and behaviors such as anger, fear, confusion, depression,
helplessness, unreasonable fear of reinjury, denial of injury severity,
and extreme guilt (1, 14). As the strength and conditioning
professional spends more time with the injured athlete throughout
the rehabilitative process, attempts to help develop a culture of
athlete safety and support throughout the return-to-play process are
designed to lessen fear and enhance motivation (59). With the
emerging issues of concussion protocols and increased awareness of
lingering effects from more severe injuries, strength and conditioning
professionals should work to help prevent further distress to the
athletes they serve.
To better support the athlete during this transition, it is essential
to understand how psychological factors may affect an athlete
during the pre- and post-injury timeline.
Psychological Factors That Can Predispose
an Athlete to Injury
Research has suggested that a variety of psychological factors can
help explain the predisposition of athletes suffering an injury (68).
514

The stress and injury model is a theoretical framework that attempts
to explain the effects of pre-injury psychological factors on athletic
injury (3). Revised by Williams and Andersen (68), the model
suggests that three unique factors can influence an athlete’s stress
response, separately or together, contributing to an athlete’s risk and
frequency of injury (figure 9.4). It includes athletes’
personality factors such as state or trait anxiety levels, mood
states, and perceived locus of control of situations and events;
history of stressors such as life events, academic stressors,
daily hassles, and previous injury history; and
coping resources such as social support, stress management
techniques, mental skills, and nutritional and lifestyle habits.
When a potentially stressful athletic situation occurs during
training, practice, or competition, these factors may affect how
athletes respond to the situation, either positively or negatively. For
example, an athlete with a history of high stress, a perfectionistic
personality, and anxiety is likely to negatively evaluate an injury. In
this case, the situation is more stressful and the athlete will likely
exhibit greater physiological activation and attentional concerns as
compared to individuals with opposite characteristics (68). Fear of
reinjury, anxiety or rumination about playing status, and inadequate
performance compared to previous standards are common thoughts
expressed by injured athletes (14, 59, 60). Appropriate interventions
that involve techniques such as cognitive restructuring (e.g.,
reframing negative thinking patterns), and relaxation techniques
(e.g., deep nasal breathing or visualization) can positively influence
the stress response and mitigate the risk of future injury (3).
Conversely, a resilient athlete (one who has overcome past injuries
and has coping skills and social support) will likely have better
adherence to rehabilitation programs and more positive outcomes
(68, 69).
515

FIGURE 9.4 The stress and injury model.
Adapted by permission from J.M. Williams and M.B. Andersen, “Psychosocial Antecedents of Sport Injury: Review and
Critique of the Stress and Injury Model,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1 (1998): 5-25, reprinted by
permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Psychological Factors That Can Affect an
Athlete After Injury
Psychological concerns emerge throughout the process of injury
recovery and often include timelines of rehabilitation to return to
training and competition. Athletes must process a variety of conflicts
once an injury has been sustained, including attending to and
listening to the body, tending to the pain versus pushing through the
pain, and interpersonal challenges and conflicts with teammates.
Also, injuries can be a challenge to an athlete’s identity and concerns
about time left in the season or his or her career and falling behind
teammates (60). Proper management of their relative effort and
intensity to avoid future reinjury becomes a primary goal. Pushing
through pain and injury may be falsely viewed as heroic and
expected by teammates, parents, coaches, and fans (63).
The Cognitive Appraisal Model (66) proposes four key components
that may influence how athletes judge their injury and how it affects
their emotional and recovery response due to injury (figure 9.5). By
understanding this model, strength and conditioning professionals
can offer more support and guidance to help athletes return to their
preexisting confidence and performance levels.
516

Personal Factors
The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete can be very
specific to each individual. Strength and conditioning professionals
can better understand how athletes will respond to injury by
understanding these key personal factors:
History of injury. Is this injury acute or chronic? Has the
athlete experienced this injury before?
Athletic identity. Does the athlete highly identify as an athlete
and look to others for acknowledgment of that role? According
to a 2022 study, almost 40% of student-athletes have a high
athletic identity, strongly serving as a foundation of their self-
worth (2).
Personality. Is the athlete naturally confident and outgoing or
introverted? Do they chronically worry about what they cannot
accomplish or perform?
Pain tolerance. How well does the athlete tolerate discomfort
during training and rehabilitation?
Coping skills. How has the athlete managed stressful situations
in the past? Do they engage in positive (e.g., regular physical
activity or relaxation strategies) or negative (e.g., risky
activities or avoidant behaviors) coping strategies?
Age and sex. Does the athlete have specific concerns due to
their age (e.g., transportation) or sex (biological differences
such as energy availability or hormonal differences)?
517

FIGURE 9.5 The cognitive appraisal model.
Reprinted by permission from D.M. Wiese-bjornstal, A.M. Smith, S.M. Shaffer, and M.A. Morrey, “An Integrated Model
of Response to Sport Injury: Psychological and Sociological Dynamics,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1
(1998): 46-69, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Situational Factors
In addition to personal factors, variability in environmental factors
can influence how athletes view their injury and their return to sport,
including the following:
Sport type. Is it individual or team based? Is there a high risk
of reinjury based on the sport?
Level of competition. Is this a high school athlete or a
professional athlete?
Social support. Is the athlete surrounded by friends, family,
and teammates for emotional and social support? Social
support helps one learn that they are valued and supported
regardless of athletic performance or the identity as a
competitive athlete (63).
Sports medicine team. Does the athlete have proper access to
a professional rehabilitative team?
518

Rehabilitation environment. Similarly, where is the athlete
rehabilitating their injury? Does it require a lengthy commute?
Is it adequate for proper sport-specific movements?
Coach influence. Does the sport coach actively support the
athlete during the rehab process? Is there pressure to return
as soon as possible with the athlete fearing losing his or her
position? Coaches should be attentive to the possibility that
athletes could be struggling with challenges related to conflicts
with coaches who may not understand the extent of their
injuries; suggest that they are weak; and may explicitly
minimize, invalidate, or dismiss the athlete’s struggles (60).
Behavioral Responses
Consider how the athlete behaves when facing the impact of injury
on his or her health and performance:
Adherence to rehabilitation. Does the athlete demonstrate
consistency and commitment to the active process?
Use of psychological skills. Are techniques such as goal
setting, imagery, and visualization integrated to improve their
recovery timeline?
Effort and intensity. How does the athlete’s level of motivation
change over time?
Malingering. Does the athlete exacerbate pain or readiness
levels to avoid future responsibilities or changes in their
timeline?
Risk-taking. Does the athlete engage in activities that have not
yet been cleared for participation? Do they avoid certain
activities because they feel they are not yet ready to perform?
Emotional Responses
Strength and conditioning professionals can become aware of the
emotional responses that athletes may experience during the return-
to-play process, including the following:
519

Injury-related fear. How does the athlete embrace progressive
overload into more sport-specific movements?
Tension, anger, depression. Has the injury created conflict
within the athlete’s normal activities of daily living and sports
participation?
Frustration and boredom. Is the rehabilitation process mentally
engaging and motivating?
Grief. Was there a loss in a specific competition or season? Did
the athlete lose his or her position or formal role with the team
due to the injury?
Positive outlook. Does the athlete view this setback as an
opportunity to rebuild and improve?
From the lens of a strength and conditioning professional,
athletes’ responses to injury are subjective and multifaceted. It is
likely that mental and physical readiness do not occur at the same
rate. The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete influences
more than weight room or athletic performance. For example, in a
study of over 100 Division I American football players, academic
stress (during regular examination periods) was associated with a
significant increase in physical injuries (36). By understanding the
pre- and post-injury psychological implications on mental and
physical performance, strength and conditioning professionals can
remain important members of the high-performance team and help
develop a more robust and resilient athlete in the future.
What Strength and Conditioning
Professionals Can Do to Help
As an integral member of the high-performance team, strength and
conditioning professionals can continue to provide the necessary
social, emotional, and physical support required for athletes (7, 45).
Effective communication between sport coaches, strength and
conditioning professionals, and sports medicine staff is imperative for
520

developing a culture that prioritizes athlete safety and maximizes
performance (59).
Regular Communication With All Stakeholders
Strength and conditioning professionals should maintain regular
communication with all athletic trainers, position coaches, parents (if
appropriate), and head coaches. During the initial stage of injury
rehabilitation, the strength and conditioning professional might
contribute minimally to the rehab process. To ensure optimal
transitions between phases of the rehabilitation program, the
strength and conditioning professional should be aware of the
training completed at the front end of the process. The sports
medicine team can ensure their involvement is sequential and
concurrent to prevent the risk of progressing too quickly and
possibly reinjuring (59). Additionally, strength and conditioning
professionals should maintain the injured athlete’s privacy and
confidentiality throughout the return-to-play process.
Specifically Tailored Training Programs
Depending on the severity of the injury, athletes could require a
modified training program that may require different exercises,
tempos, 
equipment, 
or 
arrangements 
(e.g., 
smaller, 
more
personalized settings). If the time and resources allow it, every effort
should be made to customize the training program to accommodate
the athlete’s current abilities and limitations.
Proper Goal Setting and Acknowledgment of Training
Milestones
During a lengthy return-to-play timeline, setbacks, frustration, and
lack of expedient progress are common. Coaches may consider
overlapping appropriate goal-setting techniques with the sports
medicine team to encourage and motivate the athlete. Goals should
be relevant to controllable factors (e.g., Did I come to training? Did I
perform ten repetitions?) and be flexible to prevent frustration from
unexpected adjustments (63).
521

Progressive Integration Into Full-Group or Team
Activities
One of the most basic psychological needs to enhance intrinsic
motivation is relatedness, or a sense of belonging and connection
(46). Progressively moving from privately scheduled, one-on-one
rehabilitation sessions to larger team sessions may be an
appropriate tactic to enhance the connection between the athlete
and the team.
Improve Self-Efficacy and Motivation
Readiness to return to competition is a highly subjective and
complex process. Characteristics of athletes who are ready to return
to play demonstrate realistic expectations, high levels of self-efficacy,
and low levels of anxiety (18). Coaches should minimize
psychological barriers such as fear or anxiety by providing a
psychologically 
safe 
and 
autonomy-supportive 
environment.
Additionally, enhancing the athlete’s self-efficacy about specific tasks
(e.g., sprinting, jumping, cutting) and motivation to return to pre-
injury levels would create a more intrinsically driven, process-
oriented approach compared to an extrinsically driven, outcome-
oriented approach to return to play (63).
522

Enhancing Motor Skill Acquisition and
Learning
A comprehensive understanding of the impact and value of sport
psychology on athletic performance is not complete without a
working knowledge of the overlap of motor skill acquisition and
learning topics. The integration of motor skill acquisition will improve
both the athletes’ performance and the ability of those who coach
them. Selected techniques to enhance motor skill learning are
discussed in the next sections, including those pertaining to practice
schedule, instructions, and feedback. While research demonstrates
favorable outcomes for particular techniques, it is important to
consider the unique abilities of the athlete, the task, and the
environment. What may facilitate learning for one athlete may have
a different effect on another. The following sections can thus serve
as a basic guide that can be tailored to the needs of the athlete, the
task, and the environment.
Learning–Performance Distinction
Before considering techniques to enhance motor skill learning, it is
important to recognize the learning–performance distinction.
Learning is a process that results in a relatively permanent change in
the capability to perform a motor skill (50). Performance is the
execution of the skill in the current environment (29). Performance
can be affected by arousal, motivation, and numerous other factors
and therefore may not be indicative of the skill capabilities of the
individual (9). While the techniques discussed here will facilitate skill
learning of the individual, some might actually lead to performance
decrements during the practice session. It is imperative to recognize
this possibility and not assume that an athlete’s performance during
a given practice session reflects his or her learning of the given skill.
523

Practice Schedule
Practice is essential for motor skill learning. More importantly,
challenging practice enables motor skill acquisition; mere repetitions
alone are not enough to change behavior (43). One of the many
ways to facilitate skill learning is through the manipulation of the
practice structure and schedule.
Whole Versus Part Practice
With respect to teaching a complex motor skill, there is debate about
the effectiveness of whole versus part practice. Whole practice
addresses the skill in its entirety, whereas part practice separates
the skill into a series of subcomponents. As a general rule, tasks that
are challenging but have low interrelatedness of the subcomponents
are learned better with part practice (40). For example, the snatch is
a skilled power movement that can be broken down into four
subcomponents: the first pull, transition, second pull, and catch. On
the other hand, whole practice would tend to be favored for a task
with subcomponents that are highly interrelated, because part
practice can inhibit the effective regrouping of the subcomponents
(40). In the instance of a lunge, it would be ineffective to separate
the movements of the front leg from the movements of the lead leg,
because these two components are highly interrelated. Therefore, a
lunge would be better learned as a whole. Regardless of the task
interrelatedness, in instances in which the skill may be dangerous or
costly to learn as a whole, part practice is the favored choice.
Internal and External Cues for Coaching
Feedback
The best coaching cues use the fewest words but make the greatest impact.
Sometimes gestures or single words can be effective. It is important to stay brief
with either motivation or instruction-related feedback during training sessions. If
not, coaches tend to overcoach, a process known as verbal overshadowing, which
can disrupt fluid motions by introducing cognitive processing. Athletes with limited
experience may need time to experiment and learn to move and self-correct during
524

training. Often coaches are anxious to prevent injury, and overcoaching can disrupt
the self-exploration process. By overcoaching, the athlete cannot self-correct, an
important part of autonomous learning. Cues can be internal (“breathe,” “eyes up,”
“back straight,” “heels on the floor”) and external (“push through the floor,” “try to
pull down on the bar as you come up from the squat,” “make a letter C with your
elbows as you rack the bar in the power clean”).
By focusing attention, coaches describe the mental intensity and effort needed
for the specific technique. For example, lifting coach Gayle Hatch uses cues to
teach stiff arms and trapezius contractions during the initial pull phase of the clean
movement by saying, “When the elbows bend, the power ends” (G. Hatch,
personal communication. March 15, 2007). Likewise, the cues for procedural
movements and speed for the jerk movement can include “Dip and drive.” These
represent technique and motivational cues. In the first instance, the instructions
use external cues to enhance the lifting technique. In the second example, the
coach uses motivational words to represent speed and intensity. Research has
suggested that early in learning, external cues can be very effective. As the
movements become refined and minor technique corrections are needed, internal
cues may be more appropriate (76).
If part practice is to be used, a task can be separated into
subcomponents in numerous ways. Segmentation breaks down the
task into a series of subcomponents that have clear breaks between
them (66). For example, as mentioned previously, the snatch can be
broken down into the first pull, the transition, the second pull, and
the catch. Fractionalization breaks the tasks into subcomponents
that occur simultaneously (66). In performing the push press, the
athlete practices the press motion of the arms and the push motion
of the legs independently. Simplification adjusts the difficulty of
the tasks by changing task characteristics such as the execution
speed or the equipment used (66). In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the subcomponents with a PVC pipe (or similar dowel rod).
In this instance, both segmentation and fractionalization are used.
When teaching the subcomponents of the task, multiple methods
can be used to integrate the parts back into the whole skill. Pure-
part training (also known as the part–whole method) has the
athlete practice each subcomponent of the skill multiple times
independently. After all components have been practiced, the skill is
practiced in its entirety (66). In a snatch, the first pull is practiced,
525

then the transition, followed by the second pull, and ending with the
catch. After all skills have been practiced multiple times, the snatch
is practiced. Progressive-part training has the athlete practice
the first two parts in isolation before practicing these parts together
(66). The athlete then practices the third subcomponent before
practicing all three parts together. In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the first pull and then the transition, then the first pull with
the transition. The athlete then practices the second pull before
practicing the first pull, transition, and second pull as a combined
skill. This progression continues until the whole skill has been
reintegrated. Repetitive part training has the athlete practice
only the first part in isolation; then each subsequent part is added
until the whole task is reintegrated (66). The athlete in this instance
would first practice the first pull; then the first pull with the
transition; then the first pull, transition, and second pull; and so
forth. With use of simplification, characteristics of the task can be
added gradually, increasing the difficulty of the task. The choice of
sequencing will depend on the task and the goals of the given
training session.
Random Practice
Traditionally, skills are practiced in a blocked fashion, such that the
athlete practices the same skill multiple times before progressing to
another skill. In random practice, multiple skills are practiced in a
random order during a given practice session. For example, during
blocked practice, the athlete performs multiple squat depth jumps
before progressing to another skill. In random practice, an athlete
may perform a squat depth jump, a depth jump with a lateral
movement, a split squat jump, and a side-to-side push-off in a
random order. The athlete continues to repeat these skills in a
random order. While performance on each individual skill initially
declines during random practice, learning is facilitated by this
practice design (53). When applied in a sport setting, an integration
of blocked and random practice (a few repetitive attempts at each
526

skill before proceeding) maximizes the benefits of both practice
schedules (32). In the instance of the jumps, the athlete would
perform a few repetitions of the squat depth jump before moving on
to another movement such as the side-to-side push-off.
Variable Practice
Similar to random practice, variable practice includes variations of
the same skill within a single practice session as opposed to specific
practice in which a specific skill (i.e., depth jump to second box of a
specific height) is repeated multiple times. In variable practice, the
athlete would practice stepping from and jumping to boxes of
varying heights. Similar to random practice, variable practice can
impair performance during the practice session but can enhance
performance on a novel variation of a skill (33) such as the ability to
quickly jump to a second box after stepping off a box from an
unpracticed height. A combination of specific and variable practice
allows the athlete to develop sport-specific skills while also providing
the athlete with the flexibility to perform in unfamiliar contexts (33).
This flexibility is important to an athlete’s success, because sport
requires the athlete to perform in unfamiliar environments (travel
games) and to accurately modify a practice skill in response to an
opponent. As an example, training to land from and jump to varying
heights will allow the athlete to respond in a game and execute the
skill in an unfamiliar context.
Observational Learning
Observational practice (action observation), or practice through
observation of the task or skill to be performed, has important
implications for motor skill learning. Observational practice
frequently uses prerecorded videos or live demonstrations. The
individual executing the observed skill can be a novice or a
competent or expert performer. When physical practice is combined
with observational practice, learning is enhanced (52). In a strength
and conditioning setting, partner work can facilitate learning. As one
527

athlete completes a lift or a drill, the other athlete can observe
during his or her rest period and vice versa. Sakadjian and
colleagues (49) found that observational practice combined with
physical practice facilitated improved power clean technique as
compared to physical practice alone. Observational practice can
assist athletes in achieving the desired technique, thus maintaining
athlete safety and allowing for a more rapid progression to heavier
lifting.
Instructions
A coach can facilitate learning by varying the amount of detail
provided in the instruction to the athletes’ strongest learning style.
Instructional styles can be divided into explicit instructions, guided
discovery, and discovery. Explicit instructions include prescriptive
information that gives the athlete the “rules” for effectively executing
the given task. In learning a squat, the athlete receives detailed
instructions about the specific body position throughout the
movement as well as the type (e.g., flexion–extension) and amount
of movement at each of the joints. Guided discovery provides the
athlete with instructions about the overall movement goal and
important prompts for task accomplishment without explicitly telling
the athlete how to accomplish the task. The athlete is told the goal
of the squat depth jump and a few key reminders to prevent injury,
such as maintaining a neutral spine. This style provides some
direction while allowing the athlete to explore relationships between
the executed movement patterns and the associated movement
goal. Finally, discovery instructs the athlete on the overarching goal
of the task and the athlete receives little to no direction. In this
instance the athlete is just told to squat to a particular depth and is
allowed to explore methods to accomplish this task. A discovery
instructional style can slow the learning process, while explicit
instructions can impair performance in a stressful environment (56).
The decreased attentional demands of discovery and guided
528

discovery instructional styles allow athletes to increase their focus on
the task-relevant cues related to task execution (75).
Feedback
Feedback plays a significant role in motor skill acquisition by
providing the athlete with information about the movement pattern
and the associated goal. This information can then be used to make
appropriate adjustments to achieve the desired movement pattern
and goal. Intrinsic feedback is feedback provided to the athlete by
the athlete from the senses—for example, sensory information about
missing a box during a squat box jump. Integration of the sensory
information allows the athlete to fine-tune and adjust the movement
pattern to produce the desired movement and associated task goal.
Augmented feedback is feedback provided to the athlete by either
an observer, such as a coach, or technology, such as video or
laboratory equipment. After the squat box jump, a coach can tell the
athlete that the hips’ countermovement was too slow, resulting in
missing the box.
The remainder of this section focuses on augmented feedback.
Augmented feedback can be broken down into knowledge of results
and knowledge of performance. Knowledge of results provides
the athlete with information about the execution of the task goal.
For example, with a T-drill, the coach can tell the athlete how quickly
he or she completed the drill. The athlete can also be given
normative information about how this time compares with others.
Both positive normative feedback and feedback without comparison
augment skill learning compared to negative normative feedback
(34). Knowledge of performance feedback provides the athlete
with information about his or her movement pattern. This can be
delivered in the form of video analysis or through the use of
specialized laboratory equipment such as a force plate. In the
instance of the T-drill, the coach gives the athlete specific
information about the movement during the T-test such as body
position during changes of direction. When the task goal is a
529

movement outcome—for example, proper form on a power clean—
there is an overlap between knowledge of results and knowledge of
performance and thus they can become one and the same.
The timing and frequency of feedback also influence learning
outcomes. Feedback that is offered concurrently with the task
enhances performance while impairing learning; therefore, this
feedback is beneficial in a competition setting (69). However,
feedback that is provided after task execution facilitates skill learning
(69). This feedback can be provided either after every trial or after a
series of trials. While decreased frequency impairs performance
during practice, less frequent feedback enhances skill acquisition as
compared to feedback after every trial (70), except in instances in
which the skill is complex (74). Therefore, in initial skill learning it
would be beneficial to provide more frequent feedback that
decreases as athletes progress in their skill level.
Feedback can be used to facilitate both learning and
performance. The timing and frequency of the feedback
have different influences on performance and learning.
While concurrent feedback is beneficial for competition,
delayed feedback that is initially frequent and decreases
with time will facilitate learning of complex movement
patterns.
530

Conclusion
Although a scientific and motivationally sound coaching program can
greatly help in the development of athletes, several other
complementary psychological techniques can enhance their overall
effectiveness. In reality, most athletes probably have had both
adaptive and maladaptive experiences in the form of countless
practices and competitions and, as a result, have developed a more
or less effective mental skills repertoire. A working understanding of
some of the psychological principles and tools for the generation of
cognitive–behavioral change included in this chapter may help
facilitate improved performance and an enhanced quality of life.
The coach and athlete can each contribute to improved
performance outcomes and increase the enjoyment of competition
by attending to the psychological aspects of instruction and
performance. A positive, goal-oriented coaching approach is one of
the most powerful contributors to psychological preparation for
sport. The physical and nutritional preparation of the athlete
represents the foundation on which performance potential is based,
and the role of psychology is to mentally manage the developed
physical resources (i.e., strength, speed, flexibility, and skill), thereby
allowing the athlete to achieve his or her potential on a more
consistent basis. Additionally, an adequate understanding of the
mind–body relationship, as reflected in the constructs of this chapter,
can facilitate communication between the strength and conditioning
professional and the athlete and aid the athlete in controlling and
managing 
emotion, 
arousal, 
focus, 
and 
motivation. 
Using
appropriate psychological techniques can help this self-management
process. The experience of success in sport may be important in and
of itself, but the greater outcome of improved mental skills use to
enhance self-esteem, confidence, and positive self-concept improves
the quality of life in general.
KEY TERMS
531

achievement motivation
anxiety
arousal
athletic identity
attention
augmented feedback
autogenic training
catastrophe theory
cognitive anxiety
counterconditioning
diaphragmatic breathing
discovery
distress
drive theory
emotions
eustress
explicit instructions
extrinsic motivation
fight-or-flight
flow
focal dystonia
fractionalization
goal setting
guided discovery
ideal performance state
imagery
individual zones of optimal functioning
intrinsic feedback
intrinsic motivation
inverted-U theory
knowledge of performance
knowledge of results
long-term goals
mental health
532

mental imagery
motivation
motive to achieve success (MAS)
motive to avoid failure (MAF)
negative punishment
negative reinforcement
observational practice
operant
outcome goals
part practice
physiological efficiency
positive punishment
positive reinforcement
process goals
progressive muscle relaxation (PMR)
progressive-part training
psychological efficiency
pure-part training
random practice
readiness
repetitive part training
reversal theory
routine
segmentation
selective attention
self-confidence
self-controlled practice
self-efficacy
self-talk
short-term goals
simplification
somatic anxiety
sport psychology
state anxiety
533

stress
stressor
systematic desensitization (SD)
trait anxiety
variable practice
whole practice
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is the best definition of mental health?
  a.  the ability to perform well under pressure and avoid
emotional expression
  b.  a state of emotional, psychological, and social well-being
  c.  the absence of any diagnosed mental illness
  d.  a personality trait that dictates an athlete’s motivation
status
  2.  What is the first step in identifying psychological signs of
distress in an athlete?
  a.  referring the athlete to a mental health professional
  b.  asking the athlete to complete a standardized mood
questionnaire
  c.  monitoring the athlete’s training load and recovery scores
  d.  classifying the athlete’s affect, behavior, and cognitions
  3.  Which of the following is the distinguishing factor of
depression from anxiety?
  a.  hopelessness or helplessness
  b.  rumination
  c.  worry
  d.  circular thinking
  4.  Predisposing psychological factors to injury include all the
following except which option?
  a.  history of stressors
  b.  violent outbursts
  c.  personality
534

  d.  coping resources
  5.  Which of the following best describes a key personal factor
that can influence how an athlete psychologically responds to
an injury?
  a.  type of sport that the athlete competes in
  b.  availability of a professional rehabilitative team
  c.  athlete’s history of previous injuries and coping
mechanisms
  d.  athlete’s competitive experience
535
