CHAPTER 10
BASIC NUTRITIONAL
FACTORS AFFECTING HEALTH
Cassandra Forsythe, PhD, RD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contribution of Marie Spano to this
chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
know when to refer an athlete to the appropriate resource,
such as a medical doctor or a sports dietitian;
identify the protein, carbohydrate, and fat recommendations
for athletes;
list the dietary recommendations for disease prevention and
overall health; and
list hydration and electrolyte guidelines for different age groups
and scenarios and help athletes develop an individualized
hydration plan.
Good nutrition provides athletes with the nutrients necessary for
general health, growth, development, and repairing and building
muscle tissue, as well as the energy needed to train, compete, and
maintain mental focus and concentration. A nutrition plan that is
tailored to an athlete’s specific needs can help decrease risk of
injuries and illness and maximize training adaptations (improvements
536

made from training) while helping the athlete reach his or her
performance goals. This chapter focuses on the scientific rationale
for performance-enhancing nutrition practices while providing
suggestions that will help readers apply sports nutrition science to
real-life scenarios.
Despite the plethora of credible nutrition information easily
available online, knowledge among NCAA collegiate athletes is poor
and does not meet current recommendations (135). In addition,
nutrition guidelines created for the general public are not necessarily
applicable to athletes. Because each athlete’s nutrition needs depend
on many factors (age; body size and composition; sex; genetics;
environmental training conditions; injuries; medical nutrition needs;
and duration, frequency, and intensity of training), nutrition
requirements can vary tremendously between athletes, even if they
play the same position. Finally, because nutrition is a complex,
constantly evolving science, it is important for strength and
conditioning professionals to have some basic nutrition knowledge in
addition to a list of nutrition professionals they can refer athletes to
for individualized nutrition advice based on the latest science.
537

Role of Sports Nutrition Professionals
Sports nutrition is a complex multidisciplinary field, and athletic
trainers, strength and conditioning professionals, physicians, exercise
scientists, and food service providers have varying degrees of
nutrition knowledge. Job responsibilities of player development staff
should be outlined based on the nutrition education and knowledge
of the staff member, the type of nutrition information provided, and
state licensure laws regarding nutrition practice.
All sports nutrition professionals should be able to answer basic
nutrition questions (for example, “What are some healthy snack
ideas?”). However, athletes with complex nutrition issues should be
referred to the appropriate resource, either a team physician or
sports dietitian. The team physician is responsible for overseeing the
athlete’s medical care while the sports dietitian is responsible for
providing individualized dietary advice. A sports dietitian is a
registered dietitian (also referred to as a registered dietitian
nutritionist) with specific education and experience in sports
nutrition. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) Board
Certified 
Specialist 
in 
Sports 
Dietetics 
(CSSD) 
certification
distinguishes registered dietitians with expertise in sports nutrition
from other registered dietitians who specialize in other areas of
nutrition (see the sidebar on this topic). Though some sports
dietitians have complementary skills or training and may therefore
be social workers, athletic trainers, or chefs, a comprehensive sports
nutrition program requires full-time attention; therefore, these
secondary skills should be considered a complement to the sports
dietitian’s knowledge rather than be used to try to fill two distinct job
positions with one individual. Finally, higher-level positions generally
include a sports dietitian with a master’s degree, PhD, or both. A
sports dietitian can help athletes make the connection between plate
and performance.
538

What Is a Board Certified Specialist in
Sports Dietetics (CSSD)?
According to the Commission on Dietetic Registration, the credentialing agency for
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, a CSSD “provides individual and
group/team counseling and education to enhance the performance of competitive
and recreational athletes.” Their responsibilities include:
Counseling individuals and groups on daily nutrition for performance and
health
Translating the latest scientific evidence into practical sports nutrition
recommendations
Tracking and documenting outcomes of nutrition services, serving as a food
and nutrition resource for coaches, support staff, and families
Some of the tasks that an individual with a CSSD certification can conduct
according to the CSSD exam content outline include:
Interpreting body composition assessments on active individuals
Developing appropriate body composition goals
Estimating total energy expenditure
Assessing fluid and electrolyte balance in training, performance, and recovery
Evaluating and educating on dietary supplements, beverages, ergogenic aids
using evidence-based analyses for training, performance, hydration, and
recovery
Contributing to collaborative interventions for and monitoring of disordered
eating to guide sport participation
Adapted from Commission on Dietetic Registration, “Specialty Practice Experience,” accessed August 22,
2025, https://www.cdrnet.org/specialty-practice-experience.; Commission on Dietetic Registration, “CSSD
Examination Content Online,” last modified September 21, 2023, https://www.cdrnet.org/vault/2459/web/
/CDR%20CSSD%20ECO%202023%20-%20effective%2011-2023.pdf.
At times, physicians and sports dietitians may work together to
help athletes with eating disorders, nutrient deficiencies, or specific
disease states such as diabetes. Because an athlete’s nutrition and
medical information may be shared with other members of the
player development or coaching staff or family members in order to
provide comprehensive care, in the United States all staff should
follow Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
guidelines for handling an athlete’s protected health information.
539

A sports nutrition coach is a professional who is not a registered
dietitian but has basic training in nutrition and exercise science. For
example, the strength and conditioning professional can act as a
sports nutrition coach, providing basic nutrition education and
suggestions. More complex situations in which food or nutrition is
being used to treat or manage a medical condition (that includes a
nutrient deficiency) require medical nutrition therapy and fall under
the role of the sports dietitian. Sports nutrition coaches may obtain
additional education by getting a sports nutrition certification. For
example, the National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) has a
Certified Sports Nutrition Coach certification designed for personal
trainers, health coaches, group fitness instructors, and health care
professionals. Also, the International Society of Sports Nutrition
(ISSN) Sports Nutrition Specialist (SNS) Certification requires a high
school diploma for the exam and is geared toward personal trainers
or other fitness professionals who do not hold a four-year college
degree. The ISSN also has a Certified Sports Nutritionist credential
(CISSN), which requires a four-year undergraduate degree in a
related field; or be practicing in the field of sports nutrition for at
least five years; or be certified as a personal trainer by the NSCA,
ACE, or ACSM; and is intended for health, fitness, and medical
professionals who work with athletes and active individuals.
A sports nutritionist with an advanced degree is a professional
who may work in the sports nutrition industry or conduct research in
the area of sports nutrition and would therefore be able to discuss
the literature on a particular topic. The sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree may also choose to obtain a sports nutrition
certification. One option is the IOC (International Olympic
Committee) Diploma in Sports Nutrition. This two-year online
program includes coursework, seminars, tutorials, and laboratory
practical work. The IOC states that students interested in this course
typically have a degree in nutrition or dietetics, biological sciences
(including biochemistry, physiology, or sport science), or medicine.
540

All sports nutrition professionals must follow state nutrition
licensure laws, which vary from state to state and specify who is
allowed to provide individualized nutrition counseling and medical
nutrition therapy. For instance, in Louisiana, general nutrition
education can be provided by various disciplines if the information is
general, accurate, and not individualized (based on a specific
person’s dietary needs). However, only a licensed dietitian or
nutritionist can provide nutrition assessment and counseling.
Nutrition counseling is defined as “the provision of the individual
guidance on appropriate food and nutrient intake for those with
special 
needs, 
taking 
into 
consideration 
health, 
cultural,
socioeconomic, functional, and psychological facts from the nutrition
assessment. Nutrition counseling may include advice to increase or
decrease nutrients in the diet; to change the timing and size of and
composition of meals; to modify food textures, and in extreme
instances, to change the route of administration” (www.lbedn.org).
Many individuals without any (or with minimal) education in
nutrition and exercise science and little to no formal training refer to
themselves as sports nutritionists. Regardless of the specific title of
the person providing sports nutrition information or individualized
dietary advice, strength and conditioning professionals should take a
close look at the person’s education (including the curriculum),
previous work history (especially the person’s day-to-day job duties),
knowledge of sports nutrition, and years of experience.
Experienced sports dietitians help athletes make the
connection between plate and performance. They have
advanced knowledge, skills, and expertise in sports
nutrition.
The first step in nutrition coaching involves defining the athlete’s
goals and identifying the coach’s goals (since the two may be
different). After this, similar to the strength and conditioning
professional undertaking a needs analysis, the sports dietitian will
541

take a detailed look at the athlete’s diet, individual food preferences
(including cultural and religious considerations), cooking skills,
access to food, financial constraints, barriers to making wise dietary
choices, supplement use, weight and body composition history,
medical history, training program, and injuries. The sports dietitian
will then work with the athlete to develop a plan that fits his or her
lifestyle and taste preferences while including the appropriate calorie
level; macronutrients and micronutrients in recommended amounts;
adequate fluids and electrolytes; and supplements as necessary to
help correct a nutrient deficiency, make up for potential nutrient
shortfalls, or meet training goals.
FIGURE 10.1 The MyPlate icon.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
542

Standard Nutrition Guidelines
For general nutrition information, strength and conditioning
professionals may want to refer their athletes to MyPlate, a food
guidance system created by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in
2011 and based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans to help
consumers make better food choices (100). MyPlate icon illustrates
the five food groups based on a mealtime visual, the place setting
(figure 10.1). Another helpful resource geared more toward athletes
is the Performance Enhancing Plate from the Collegiate and
Professional Sports Dietitians Association (CPSDA, www.sportsrd
.org). This plate encourages athletes on hard training days to make
half their plate whole grains to fuel muscles, followed by 1/4 of the
plate from fruits and vegetables and the other 1/4 from proteins.
MyPlate Guidelines and Recommendations
Information related to MyPlate can be found at www.myplate.gov.
Although the basic guidelines represented by the MyPlate icon and
corresponding educational materials are universal, they include
calorie 
guidelines 
and 
portion 
recommendations 
for 
fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, and dairy and fortified soy
alternatives, based on age and sex for individuals who get less than
30 minutes of moderate physical activity most days, as noted in
tables 10.1 to 10.6 on pages 221 through 226. Those who are more
physically active should adjust the guidelines to meet their specific
dietary needs (143). Additional key nutritional topics for MyPlate
include guidelines for oils, added sugars, saturated fats, sodium, and
alcohol. Oils are not a food group but provide important nutrients
such as mono- and polyunsaturated fats and vitamin E. Added
sugars are sugars and syrups that are added to foods or beverages
when they are made. To build healthy eating habits and stay within
calorie needs, people over age 2 should eat foods and drink
beverages with little or no added sugars; athletes who need
hydration beverages with added sugars are the exception to this
543

recommendation (3). Saturated fat is fat that is often found solid at
room temperature. Examples of these include milk fat, butter, or the
fat inside or around meat. Ideally, saturated fat should be limited in
the diet and the focus should be on unsaturated fats such as liquid
oils used in cooking. In a general, nonactive population, sodium
should also be minimized in the diet to no more than 2,300
milligrams per day, but health recommendations for lower salt intake
may not be appropriate for endurance athletes and those who sweat
a lot. Alcohol has calories but few nutrients; adults of legal drinking
age who choose to drink should do so in moderation.
MyPlate should be considered a starting point that athletes can
use to evaluate their diet. In general, if a diet provides a variety of
foods from each group, it is more likely to contain an adequate
amount of each macronutrient, vitamin, and mineral. However, if the
diet excludes an entire food group, specific nutrients may be lacking.
For example, an athlete who excludes dairy from the diet may have
a tough time meeting his or her nutrition requirements for calcium
and vitamin D (in fortified milk and fortified yogurts). Fortified soy
alternatives are viewed by the USDA as the only plant-based milk
alternative equivalent to milk, whereas other nondairy milk
alternatives do not have the same nutritional value as milk and must
be chosen carefully to avoid deficiencies in calcium and vitamin D
(45). Added sugars are also a concern in plant-based milk
alternatives. Individuals who exclude all animal foods and fish might
not meet their vitamin B12 needs. B12 is found in meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, and dairy foods, though some breakfast cereals, nondairy milk
alternatives, meat substitutes, and nutritional yeast are fortified with
B12. Thus, it is highly recommended that individuals who exclude
food groups work with their sports dietitian to find suitable
replacements or replacement combinations to ensure that they meet
their nutrient requirements for health and performance.
Foods within each food group share similar nutrient compositions
and are considered interchangeable; however, a variety of foods
should be consumed within each group. For example, eating an
544

orange, an apple, and a pear provides a broader array of essential
nutrients than is provided by three apples. A diet providing a variety
of foods from each group is more likely to meet a person’s
macronutrient (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) as well as
micronutrient (vitamins and minerals) needs.
The resources section of the MyPlate website offers several tools
to help plan a healthy diet. MyPlate Plan gives food group targets of
what and how much to eat within a person’s calorie allowance based
on age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. It also comes
as an app, MyPlate App, to help build healthy habits, pick daily food
goals, and set real-time progress. Further, there is the Shop Simple
with MyPlate Tool that can be used to find cost-saving food-
purchasing methods and new ways to prepare budget-friendly foods.
Dietary Reference Intakes
Because athletes eat food, not individual nutrients, dietary
recommendations should be presented in terms of specific food
choices. However, it is also important to have an understanding of
the athlete’s nutrient requirements in order to make food
recommendations. The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs),
developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and of
Health and Human Services (HHS), are a complete set of nutrient
intakes for use when evaluating and planning diets for healthy
individuals. The DRIs are listed for the macronutrients as well as
micronutrients, electrolytes, and water (71-75, 109, 118, 164). The
DRIs are based on the body of literature regarding nutrient intake
and the reduction of chronic disease, as opposed to simply
prevention of dietary deficiencies (115). Because nutrient intake can
vary considerably from day to day, the DRIs apply to a person’s
usual intake. Therefore, when a sports dietitian assesses a person’s
nutrient intake, they look at several days in order to get an average
daily intake for each nutrient. This is especially true with regard to
evaluating intake of nutrients found in few foods or in very small
amounts in foods (115). Fewer days’ worth of food records are
545

needed to get a good estimation of average protein intake, since this
does not vary much from day to day (115). The DRIs include the
following:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The average daily
nutrient requirement adequate for meeting the needs of nearly all
(97%-98%) healthy people within each life stage and sex; often
used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for people.
Adequate Intake (AI)—The average daily nutrient intake level
recommended when a RDA cannot be established.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)—The maximum average
daily nutrient level not associated with any adverse health effects.
Intakes above the UL increase potential risk of adverse effects.
(The UL represents intake from all sources including food, water,
and supplements.)
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)—The average daily
nutrient intake level considered sufficient to meet the needs of
half of the healthy population within each life stage and sex.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 has identified
several dietary nutrients that are under-consumed by the public
(males and females in all age groups); these nutrients are identified
as the Nutrients of Public Health Concern and include dietary fiber,
vitamin D, calcium, and potassium (56). Dietary patterns that do not
meet the recommended intakes of fruits, vegetables, and whole
grains are often lacking in adequate dietary fiber and potassium.
More than 90 percent of women and 97 percent of men do not meet
recommended intakes for dietary fiber. Potassium-rich foods include
vegetables, fruits, dairy, and protein foods, particularly white baked
potatoes, acorn squash, cooked spinach, cooked plantains, kiwifruit,
100% orange juice, bananas, and plain nonfat or low-fat yogurt.
Dairy foods, fortified beverages (e.g., soy beverages and orange
juice), and canned sardines and salmon are excellent sources of
calcium, while fatty fish, fortified beverages (e.g., milk, orange juice,
soy beverages), and fortified yogurt are excellent sources of vitamin
546

D. Also, iron is a concern for specific populations, particularly female
athletes (149). Iron-deficient anemia and iron deficiency are five to
seven times more common in female athletes than male athletes.
Shellfish (e.g., oysters and mussels), iron-fortified cereals, dark leafy
greens (e.g., spinach), and soybeans are excellent sources of iron,
providing 20% or more of the daily value for iron per serving; red
meat and poultry are considered good sources (41a).
For More Information on Nutrition
Strength and conditioning professionals can rely on the following websites for more
information about nutrition:
DRI Calculator for Healthcare Professionals (based on the DRIs, this dietary
planning tool calculates daily nutrient recommendations):
www.nal.usda.gov/human-nutrition-and-food-safety/dri-calculator
National Institutes of Health—Office of Dietary Supplements:
https://ods.od.nih.gov
The Dietary Supplement Label Database (DSLD) from the Office of Dietary
Supplements (ODS) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) captures all
information printed on labels of dietary supplement products sold in the United
States and can be used by consumers to learn more about ingredients listed
within the Supplement Facts label by clicking on ingredient names:
https://dsld.od.nih.gov
The Healthy Living and Weight section of the USDA Nutrition.gov website gives
information and support for establishing and maintaining a positive body image
through healthy eating habits, strategies for success to help someone to lose or
gain weight safely and effectively, weight management for children and teens,
and information on how to evaluate claims made by weight-loss products and
diets:
www.nutrition.gov/topics/healthy-living-and-weight
Peer-reviewed journal articles:
www.pubmed.gov
Collegiate and Professional Sports Dietitians Association:
www.sportsrd.org
International Society of Sports Nutrition:
www.sportsnutritionsociety.org
Sports and Human Performance Nutrition (SHPN):
547

https://www.shpndpg.org/home
548

Macronutrients
A macronutrient is a nutrient that is required in significant amounts
in the diet. Three important classes of macronutrients are protein,
carbohydrate, and fat.
Protein
Protein is the primary structural and functional component of every
cell in the human body (164). Dietary proteins are used for growth
and development and to build and repair cells; they also serve as
enzymes, transport carriers, and hormones. Therefore, dietary
protein intake is essential for maintaining health, reproduction, and
cellular structure and function (164).
Proteins are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. Amino means “nitrogen containing,” and amino acids are
the molecules that, when joined in groups of a few dozen to
hundreds, form the thousands of proteins occurring in nature.
Proteins in the human body are composed of various combinations
of the 20 individual amino acids. Nine amino acids are “essential”
because the body cannot manufacture them—they must be obtained
through the diet. Four amino acids can be synthesized by the human
body and are therefore considered “nonessential” because they do
not need to be consumed in the diet. Finally, seven amino acids are
considered conditionally essential. These amino acids are typically
not essential but become essential, and therefore must be obtained
through the diet, during times of illness and stress. The amino acids
are listed in table 10.7.
TABLE 10.7 Essential, Nonessential, and
Conditionally Essential Amino Acids
Essential
Nonessential
Conditionally essential
Histidine
Alanine
Arginine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference Intakes, Food and Nutrition Board (2005), 593.
549

Essential
Nonessential
Conditionally essential
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
Asparagine
Aspartic acid (aspartate)
Glutamic acid (glutamate)
Cysteine (cystine)
Glutamine
Glycine
Proline
Serine
Tyrosine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference Intakes, Food and Nutrition Board (2005), 593.
Amino acids are joined together by peptide bonds. Two amino
acids together are referred to as a dipeptide, and several amino
acids together are referred to as a polypeptide. Polypeptide chains
bond together to form a multitude of proteins with various structures
and functions. Almost half of the body’s protein reserve exists as
skeletal muscle, while approximately 15% makes up structural
tissues including skin and blood. The rest of the body’s protein
reserves are in visceral tissues such as the liver and kidney and in
the bones (47).
Protein Quality and Dietary Recommendations
Protein quality is determined by amino acid content and protein
digestibility, as calculated by how much of the protein’s nitrogen is
absorbed during digestion and its ability to provide the amino acids
necessary for growth, maintenance, and repair. Higher-quality
proteins are highly digestible and contain all of the essential amino
acids. Animal-based proteins—including eggs, dairy foods, meat,
fish, and poultry—contain all of the essential amino acids, while soy,
quinoa, and buckwheat are the only plant-based proteins that
contain all nine essential amino acids. In general, plant proteins are
less digestible than animal proteins, though digestibility can
sometimes be improved through processing and preparation (110,
164). Although measures of protein quality, such as the protein
digestibility correct amino acid score (PDCAAS), take protein
550

digestibility (or bioavailability) into account as well as a protein’s
ability to provide the essential amino acids necessary for the
synthesis of body proteins and other metabolites, they do not take
into account how other compounds within the food alter the
bioavailability of the protein’s amino acids. Foods contain
antinutritional factors—compounds that reduce the digestion and
absorption of a nutrient, making it less available for use by the body
(92). Several antinutritional factors lead to digestive losses and
structural changes of amino acids that limit amino acid bioavailability
(110). For instance, during cooking, some foods will brown; this
browning, called a Maillard reaction, leads to compounds that can
decrease the bioavailability of certain amino acids. Although the
majority of plant-based foods fall short in one or more essential
amino acids, all people, not just vegetarians and vegans (those who
consume only plants and plant products—no meat, fish, poultry,
eggs, milk, or other foods that come from animals), can meet their
protein needs by consuming a variety of plant foods including
legumes, vegetables, seeds, nuts, rice, and whole grains that
provide different amino acids so that all essential amino acids are
consumed over the course of the day (152). Novel plant-based meat
alternatives are also an emerging option to meet dietary protein
needs, particularly given that our world population is growing and
living longer, and animal proteins alone cannot sustain all of our
protein needs.
While 
dietary 
recommendations 
are 
stated 
as 
protein
requirements, the actual requirement is for amino acids. The need
for amino acids in sedentary, healthy adults results from the
constant turnover of cells and cellular proteins. During cell turnover
—the constant breakdown and regeneration of cells—the body’s free
amino acid pool is the immediate and largest supplier of amino acids
(105). The pool is replenished from dietary protein digestion, as well
as the amino acids released from tissue turnover. Substantially more
protein is turned over daily than is ordinarily consumed, indicating
that amino acids are recycled (119). This process is not completely
551

efficient, however, so dietary amino acid intake is required to replace
losses.
The RDA for protein for men and women 19 years of age and
older, based on nitrogen balance studies, is 0.8 grams of high-quality
protein per kilogram body weight per day (164). Children, teens, and
pregnant and lactating women have higher dietary protein needs as
reflected in the RDA for these groups. However, protein needs are
inversely proportional to calorie intake because small amounts of
protein can be metabolized as a source of energy when a person is
in a state of negative calorie balance, when fewer calories are
consumed than are expended (e.g., typically only 1%-6% of total
caloric expenditure in most circumstances but up to 10% during
prolonged exercise in a glycogen-depleted state) (98, 164). In this
case, the protein cannot be used for the intended purpose of
replacing the amino acid pool. When caloric intake goes down,
protein requirement goes up (101). Therefore, the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) established an Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range (AMDR) for protein, which covers a wide
range of protein intake. The AMDR is 5% to 20% of total calories for
children ages 1 to 3 years, 10% to 30% of total calories for children
ages 4 to 18 years, and 10% to 35% of total calories for adults older
than age 18 years (164). Adult men and women typically consume
an average of 16% of their calories from protein (68). The AMDR for
a nutrient includes a range of intakes associated with reduced risk of
chronic disease while still providing adequate intakes of other
essential nutrients (118). Though the DRI for protein fits within the
AMDR, the DRI is based solely on body weight and therefore does
not take low or high calorie intakes into account. Based on the
AMDR, when calorie intake is lower, protein needs to go up as a
percentage of total calorie intake by approximately 1% for every
100-calorie decrease below 2,000 calories. When total calorie intake
is higher, protein needs, expressed as a percentage of total caloric
intake, go down to a certain point. In practice, sports dietitians
552

should first establish an athlete’s protein intake and then add
carbohydrate and fats as determined by total calorie needs (95).
Concerns About the RDA for Protein
Controversy surrounds the RDA for protein since some scientists
suggest that adults should consume more than the RDA for bone
health (59), weight management, and building and repairing muscle
(122, 123). In addition, research suggests that higher-protein,
lower-carbohydrate 
diets 
can 
favorably 
affect 
blood 
lipids,
particularly in obese individuals, and therefore also decrease some of
the risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome
(94).
Protein is a building block for strong bones, contributing to 50%
of bone volume and 33% of bone mass (96). Protein’s effect on
bone may be due, in part, to its influence on insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), which is produced in the liver and promotes bone
and muscle formation (144). Though research suggests that
supplemental, but not dietary, protein increases calcium losses
through urine, in healthy individuals consuming 0.7 to 2.1 grams of
protein per kilogram body weight, both urinary calcium excretion and
intestinal calcium absorption increase (88). In fact, low dietary
protein intake (0.7 g protein per kg body weight per day) suppresses
intestinal calcium absorption (87). The effects of protein on bone
health have been the center of some controversy, but experimental
studies generally indicate that dietary protein supports bone health
when consumed as part of a high-quality whole-food diet containing
adequate calcium. However, future high-quality experimental studies
are necessary to fully understand the interactive effects of dietary
protein and diet quality on bone health (37).
Protein also plays a multifaceted role in weight management.
First, it promotes satiety in a dose-dependent manner: Greater
amounts of protein lead to a greater increase in satiety (48).
However, the satiating effect of protein also depends on the timing
of protein intake, form (solid vs. liquid), concurrent intake of other
553

macronutrients, and time until the next meal (4). The type of protein
may also have an effect on satiety, though research has not fully
elucidated which proteins may have the greatest impact (16, 101).
Protein also has the greatest thermic effect of feeding—more
calories are burned during the digestion of protein as compared to
carbohydrate or fat. Finally, higher protein diets help spare muscle
loss while a person is on a reduced-calorie diet (93, 132).
The amino acids in protein are used for growth (including muscle
growth) and for repairing tissue, synthesizing enzymes and
hormones, and repairing and making new cells. Though adults in a
general fitness program can likely meet their protein requirements
by consuming 0.8 to 1.0 gram of protein per kilogram body weight
per day, athletes and those who exercise intensely require more
protein (76). Traditionally, aerobic endurance athletes have placed
less of a priority on protein in comparison to carbohydrate; however,
adequate protein intake and timing are crucial for optimal
performance. Protein recommendations for aerobic endurance
athletes are 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
per day (167). For building muscle mass and for maintaining muscle
mass through a positive muscle protein balance, an overall daily
protein intake in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day is ideal (76). Athletes who are on a
reduced-calorie diet may need more protein per day to preserve
muscle tissue during weight loss (76).
In addition to eating the right amount of protein per day, research
supports the idea of athletes consuming sufficient protein as soon as
possible after exercise, when muscle tissue is most receptive to
amino acids in order to maximize muscle growth (76). In fact, after
exercise, both muscle protein synthesis and breakdown are
increased, though net protein balance is negative when the exercise
is done in a fasted state (127). Protein consumed after exercise
increases muscle protein synthesis, and muscles remain sensitive to
protein ingestion for at least 24 hours following a resistance training
bout (114). Reviews surrounding postexercise protein ingestion have
554

suggested that when recommended levels of protein are consumed,
the effect of protein timing appears to be, at best, minimal; total
daily protein intake is the most important factor in promoting
exercise-induced muscle growth (5, 140). While nutrient timing of
protein potentially can be a beneficial strategy for enhancing muscle
protein synthesis, the effects on muscle hypertrophy ultimately
depend on the timing of the preworkout protein meal; the closer the
meal is to the training session, the less need for immediate
postworkout protein intake (140). To maximize muscle growth,
consume high-quality protein (at a dose of approximately 0.4 to 0.5
g of protein per kg of lean body mass) both before and after
exercise within about 4 to 6 hours of each other, depending on meal
size (140). Athletes with high body masses may struggle to consume
enough protein to meet required daily needs. Therefore, it is
recommended that these athletes consume high-quality protein
immediately to 2 hours after exercise (86). Ingesting 20 to 40 grams
of high-quality protein every 3 to 4 hours throughout the day
appears to most favorably affect muscle protein synthesis and is
associated with improved body composition and performance
outcomes, particularly in strength athletes (86). Aerobic endurance
athletes may benefit from the addition of high-quality protein during
endurance exercise in addition to their regular carbohydrate intake
to suppress muscle damage and improve feelings of soreness (76).
Concerns surrounding protein intakes above the RDA are
unfounded for the most part in healthy individuals (105). Proteins
consumed in excess of the amount needed for the synthesis of
tissue are broken down (103), the nitrogen is excreted as urea in
urine, and the remaining ketoacids are either used directly as
sources of energy or converted to carbohydrate (gluconeogenesis)
or body fat (64). In fact, a study examining high protein intake in
athletes found that protein intakes up to 2.8 grams per kilogram
body weight (as assessed by a seven-day diet record) did not impair
any measures of renal function (130). The strength and conditioning
professional should be aware that consistently high protein intakes,
555

above recommended levels for building and repairing muscle, are
not recommended because carbohydrate and fat intake (and the
nutrients commonly found in carbohydrate- and fat-rich foods) may
be compromised. The protein content of commonly consumed foods
is listed in table 10.8.
Athletes require more than the RDA for protein to build
and repair muscle. Depending on the sport and the
training program, 1.2 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body
weight of protein is recommended.
Carbohydrate
Carbohydrate primarily serves as a source of energy. However,
carbohydrate is not an essential nutrient, because the body can
break down the carbon skeletons of certain amino acids and convert
them into glucose (i.e., gluconeogenesis). Carbohydrates are
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Carbohydrates can be
classified into three groups according to the number of sugar
(saccharide) units they contain: monosaccharides, disaccharides,
and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, and galactose) are
single-sugar molecules. In the body, glucose is present as circulating
sugar in the blood, where it is used as the primary energy substrate
for cells. In addition, glucose molecules make up glycogen, a
polysaccharide stored in muscle and liver cells. In food, glucose is
typically combined with other monosaccharides to form various
sugars, such as sucrose. Isolated glucose found in candy or sport
drinks is found in the form of dextrose, a chemical isomer of
glucose. Fructose has the same chemical formula as glucose, but
because the atoms are arranged differently, it tastes much sweeter
and has different properties. Fructose accounts for the sweet taste
of honey and occurs naturally in fruits and vegetables. In the body,
fructose causes less insulin secretion than other sugars, which has
made it a focus of much research in the area of aerobic endurance
556

performance. Galactose, the third monosaccharide, combines with
glucose to form lactose, milk sugar.
TABLE 10.8 Protein Content of Common Foods
Food
Serving
size
Serving size in
grams
Average amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Almonds
1/4 cup
39
8
Bacon, pork
3 slices
27.3
11
Beef, ground, 80% lean,
pan browned
3 oz
85
23
Black beans
1/2 cup
92.5
7.5
Cashews
1/4 cup
32
5.5
Cheese, feta
1 oz
28
4
Cheese slice, cheddar
1 slice
21
5.5
Cheese slice, Swiss
1 slice
28
7.5
Cheese, string, part
skim
1 oz (1
stick)
28
7
Chicken breast
3 oz
85
25
Chicken, thigh with skin
1
111
28
Clams, in shell
3 oz
85
22
Cottage cheese, 1%
4 oz
113
14
Deli turkey
5 oz
142
19
Edamame
1/2 cup
73.5
8.5
Egg, whole, large
1
56
7
Garbanzo beans
1/3 cup
83.5
6
Goat cheese, soft
1 oz
28
5
Greek yogurt, nonfat
6 oz
170
17
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition Research Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/.
557

Food
Serving
size
Serving size in
grams
Average amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Hamburger patty
3 oz
85
22
Herring, pickled
¼ cup
35
5
Hot dog, beef
1
50
6
Kidney beans
1/2 cup
88.5
7.5
Kielbasa, beef polska
2 oz
56
7
Lamb chop
3 oz
85
24
Lima beans
1/2 cup
94
7
Lobster, steamed
3 oz
85
16
Mahimahi fish, baked
3 oz
85
20
Milk, 1%, low-fat
8 fl oz
245
8
Mussels, steamed
3 oz
85
20
Oysters, raw
4 oz
113
6.5
Peanut butter
2 tbsp
32
8
Peanuts
1/4 cup
35.5
9
Pistachios
1/4 cup
30.5
7
Pork, ham
3 oz
85
15
Pork tenderloin
3 oz
85
23
Salmon, canned
2 oz
56
13
Salmon, filet, baked
3 oz
85
17
Sausage links
3 links
63
10
Shrimp, large
4
22
5
Sirloin steak
3 oz
85
26
Soy milk
8 fl oz
245
8
Soy nuts
1/4 cup
23
9
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition Research Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/.
558

Food
Serving
size
Serving size in
grams
Average amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Tilapia, filet, baked
3 oz
85
22
Tortilla, flour, 8 in.
1
51
4.5
Trout, filet, baked
3 oz
85
20
Tuna, canned
3 oz (1/2
can)
85
22
Turkey breast, roasted
3 oz
85
25
Turkey, ground cooked
3 oz
85
23
Turkey, sausage smoked
1 oz
28
4
Wheat bagel, 5 in.
1 bagel
98
10
Wheat bread
1 slice
29
3
Veal steak
3 oz
85
21
Venison roast
3 oz
85
25
Whey protein powder
isolate
1 oz
30
20
Yogurt, Greek, plain,
low-fat
1 cup
245
24
Yogurt, plain, low-fat
1 cup
245
13
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition Research Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/.
Disaccharides (sucrose, lactose, and maltose) are composed
of two simple sugar units joined together. Sucrose (or table sugar),
the most common disaccharide, is a combination of glucose and
fructose. Sucrose occurs naturally in most fruits and is crystallized
from the syrup of sugar cane and sugar beets to make brown, white,
or powdered sugar. Lactose (glucose + galactose) is found only in
mammalian milk. Maltose (glucose + glucose) occurs primarily when
polysaccharides are broken down during digestion. It also occurs in
559

the fermentation process of alcohol and is the primary carbohydrate
in beer.
Polysaccharides, also known as complex carbohydrates, contain
up to thousands of glucose units. Some of the most common
polysaccharides of nutritional importance are starch, fiber, and
glycogen. Starch is the storage form of glucose in plants. Grains,
legumes, and vegetables are good sources of starch. Before starch
can be used as a source of energy, it must be broken down into
glucose components. Dietary fiber, a constituent of the plant cell
wall, is also a form of carbohydrate. Cellulose, hemicellulose, beta-
glucans, and pectins are fibers; these and noncarbohydrate fibrous
materials (lignins) are partially resistant to human digestive
enzymes. Fibers have different physiological effects in the body.
Some delay gastric emptying, which may temporarily influence
feelings of fullness, while other types of fiber increase bulk and
water content, reducing constipation and decreasing transit time of
feces. In addition, some soluble fibers decrease the absorption of
cholesterol and may therefore help reduce blood cholesterol levels
after ingestion (104), while prebiotic dietary fibers selectively
stimulate the growth of bacteria in the gut (33, 133). Fiber-rich
foods include beans, peas, bran, many fruits and vegetables, and
some whole-grain foods.
Glycogen is found in small (80, 161) amounts in human liver and
muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of glycogen per kilogram
body weight (1) and in animal tissue as a temporary source of
stored energy (22). While present in animal meats we eat such as
steak, chicken breast, and fish fillets, it is not present to any large
extent. When glucose enters the muscles and liver, if it is not
metabolized for energy it can be synthesized to form glycogen.
Three-quarters of the glycogen in the body is stored in skeletal
muscle; the remaining quarter is stored in the liver (22). The process
of converting glucose to glycogen is called glycogenesis.
Athletes typically consume a variety of carbohydrates in their
normal diets. However, when they want to improve the quality of
560

their diet, by consuming fewer foods that have untoward effects on
overall health or performance, they may consider macronutrient
ranking systems such as the glycemic index or glycemic load.
Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
The glycemic index (GI) ranks carbohydrates according to how
quickly they are digested and absorbed, and therefore raise blood
glucose levels, in the 2-hour time period after a meal, compared to
the same amount (by weight in grams) of a reference food, typically
white bread or glucose, which is given a GI of 100 (78).
Glycemic index = Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose
response after consumption of a 25 or 50g carbohydrate portion of a test food
÷ Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose response after
consumption of the same portion (in grams) of a standard food × 100      
(10.1)
Low-GI foods are digested and absorbed slowly, resulting in a
smaller rise in blood glucose and subsequent insulin release from the
pancreas compared to the reference food (7, 78). Insulin helps lower
blood glucose levels by facilitating glucose transport into cells. The
fate of glucose within cells depends on where it is shuttled. For
instance, muscle cells use glucose for energy while fat cells convert
glucose into triglycerides (fat).
Though the GI was developed to help people better control their
blood sugar levels—something that is particularly helpful for those
with diabetes—research in large cohorts of participants has
suggested that diets with high versus low GI foods are associated
with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes-related cancers, and all-cause mortality (49, 79). However,
the GI system has a few issues that may limit its accuracy. First,
published GI values for a given type of food may vary considerably
due to differences in testing and variations in ingredients used;
ripeness of food; and method of food processing, cooking, and
storage (28, 62). Secondly, consuming carbohydrate as part of a
meal or in different quantities affects the GI (7, 8). Low-GI foods
561

generally include vegetables, legumes, beans, and whole grains
(table 10.9).
TABLE 10.9 Glycemic Index (GI) of Various Foods
Low-GI foods (<55)
Medium-GI foods (55-69)
High-GI foods (>70)
Apple juice, unsweetened
Banana, ripe
Carrots, raw
Chocolate, milk and dark
Corn tortilla
Grapefruit
Ice cream
Kidney beans
Lentils
Milk, soy or dairy
Orange, raw
Quinoa, cooked
Tomato juice
Yogurt, fruit
Brown rice, boiled
Carrots, boiled
Couscous
Honey
Muesli
Pineapple, raw
Popcorn
Potato, French fries
Rice vermicelli
Rolled oats, quick
Soft drink, soda
Spaghetti, pasta, boiled
Sweet potato, boiled
Tropical blend fruit drink
Cornflakes cereal
English muffin
Glucose
Jellybeans
Potato, boiled
Potato, instant mashed
Rice crackers, crisps
Rice milk
Shredded wheat
Tofu-based frozen dessert
Watermelon, raw
White bread
White rice, boiled
Whole wheat bread
Based on Atkinson et al. (2021).
Since the GI indicates how quickly a carbohydrate-rich food
affects blood glucose levels, it is hypothesized that eating foods with
different GI values before, during, and after exercise can affect
exercise performance (111). Consumption of a low-GI meal before
exercise can lead to a reduced blood glucose and insulin response,
which has been proposed to help promote fat oxidation and maintain
normal blood glucose levels during exercise (156). Although some
scientists have speculated that consumption of low-GI foods before
exercise might spare carbohydrate by minimizing insulin secretion
and therefore improve performance, evidence to support this
hypothesis is inefficient (111). The research is mixed, with some
studies showing that consumption of a low-GI food as compared to a
high-GI food before exercise improves exercise time to exhaustion
(41, 162) and others finding that consuming a preexercise low-GI
food versus a high-GI food had no effect on running and aerobic
562

endurance exercise performance (29, 155). Therefore, athletes who
use the GI to guide their food choices while balancing health and
performance can maintain an adequate amount of dietary
carbohydrate with low-GI foods as the base of their choices while
sticking with high-GI foods in and around exercise training to provide
immediate sources of energy (sugar) for activity (25) and to more
rapidly replenish glycogen stores (86).
The glycemic load (GL) takes the amount of carbohydrate, in
grams, in a portion of food into account—a factor that also
influences glycemic response. Because GL takes portion size into
account, it is a more realistic gauge of glycemic response than the
GI, which is based on a standard serving size. Table 10.10 shows the
difference in GI and GL for specific foods.
The GL is equal to the GI multiplied by the amount of
carbohydrate in a portion of the food and dividing this total by 100.
Glycemic load = GI of an individual food × grams of carbohydrate per
serving   of food ÷ 100      (10.2)
Foods with a higher GL are expected to lead to greater increases in
blood sugar and subsequent insulin release (7, 8). A low-GL diet,
combined with exercise, has been shown to improve insulin
sensitivity in older, obese adults and therefore may be a potential
treatment for this population (90), while observational and
intervention studies suggest that low-GI and low-GL diets are
associated with lower levels of inflammatory markers and fasting
insulin (79). Chronic low-grade inflammation is considered a
potential risk factor for chronic diseases (21). In addition, some
(though not all) studies have found that diets with a lower GI or GL
are associated with lower levels of fasting insulin as well as fewer
cardiovascular risk factors (67, 145).
Fiber
Diets low in fiber have been associated with constipation, heart
disease, colon cancer, and type 2 diabetes. The DRI for fiber ranges
from 21 to 25 grams per day for women (depending on age,
563

pregnancy, and lactation) and 30 to 38 grams per day for men based
on age group. Fiber is commonly found in fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, legumes, and whole-grain products such as whole-grain
bread, oatmeal, and popcorn.
Health Factors Associated With Food
Sensitivities and Allergies
A food allergy is defined as “an adverse health effect arising from a specific
immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food,” and a
food sensitivity, also known as food intolerance, is defined as “nonimmune
reactions that include metabolic, toxic, pharmacologic, and undefined mechanisms”
(17). Reactions to food allergies range in severity from rash to anaphylaxis, which
is life-threatening (151). The eight most common food allergens in the United
States are cow’s milk, wheat, eggs, tree nuts, peanut, fish, shellfish, and soy (53);
these foods must be identified on ingredient labels to prevent adverse reaction in
affected individuals (10). Celiac disease (CD) is a type of food allergy triggering an
immune response to dietary gluten, a protein found in cereals such as wheat, rye,
and barley (97). Food intolerances, especially self-reported, are more prevalent
than food allergies (53); a United States–based survey among adults showed that
the prevalence of self-reported food intolerances was 25% (77). The most
common food intolerance is to lactose, affecting nearly 65% of the population
(53). Some food intolerances cannot be readily explained and are classified as
undefined; a well-known example of this is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS),
characterized by abdominal pain, bloating, abdominal distension, flatulence,
constipation, or diarrhea (151). Dietary management of food sensitivities often
includes elimination diets, where common trigger foods are removed from the diet,
and then slowly reintroduced (151). Individuals with food allergies and intolerances
should work with a registered dietitian to ensure nutritional needs are met.
Fat
Although the terms fat and lipid are often used interchangeably,
lipid is a broader term. Lipids include triglycerides (fats and oils) as
well as related fatty compounds, such as sterols and phospholipids.
The lipids of greatest significance in nutrition are triglycerides, fatty
acids, phospholipids, and cholesterol. Triglycerides are formed by
the union of glycerol with three fatty acids. The majority of lipids
564

found in foods and in the body are in the triglyceride form, and
within this chapter the term fat refers to triglycerides.
TABLE 10.10 Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
Food
Serving
size (g)
Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)
Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)
Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Angel food cake
50
67 ± 5
29
19
Apple (different
varieties)
120
38 ± 2
15
6
Apple juice,
unsweetened
(250 mL)
8.5 fl oz
40 ± 1
29
12
Bagel, white, frozen
70
72
35
25
Banana, ripe
120
51
25
13
Blueberry muffin
60
50 ± 3
31
15
Cheese pizza
(Pillsbury Canada Ltd)
100
60
27
16
Chocolate milk
(powder dissolved in
milk)
250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)
43
11
5
Chocolate pudding,
instant, made from
powder and whole
milk
100
47 ± 4
16
7
Corn, sweet
150
53 ± 4
32
17
English muffin
30
77 ± 7
14
11
Grapes
120
46 ± 3
18
8
Ice cream
50
61 ± 7
13
8
Jellybeans
30
80 ± 8
28
22
Kidney beans, canned
150
52
17
9
Based on Atkinson et al. (2008).
565

Food
Serving
size (g)
Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)
Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)
Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Mashed potatoes,
instant
150
85 ± 3
20
17
Muesli
30
55 ± 10
19
11
Oatmeal, prepared
50
69
35
24
Plantain
120
68 ± 6
31
21
Potato chips
50
51 ± 7
24
12
Raisins
60
64 ± 11
44
28
Rice, brown
(steamed, USA)
150
50
33
16
Rice, white, long
grain, boiled 20-30
min
150
50
36
18
Soft drink
250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)
63
26
16
Strawberries
120
40 ± 7
3
1
Sweet potato, boiled
150
61 ± 7
28
17
Tomato juice
250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)
23 ± 6
7
2
Vanilla wafers
25
77
18
14
Whole wheat bread
30
72 ± 6
12
8
Yogurt, low-fat
(0.9%), wild
strawberry
200
31 ± 14
30
9
Based on Atkinson et al. (2008).
Like carbohydrate, fat contains carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen
atoms, but because the fatty acid chains have more carbon and
hydrogen relative to oxygen, they provide more energy per gram.
For 
example, 
fats 
provide 
approximately 
9 
kcal/g, 
while
566

carbohydrates and protein provide approximately 4 kcal/g. Dietary
fats and oils are composed of different types of fatty acids.
Saturated fatty acids have no double bonds, and their carbon
molecules are saturated with hydrogen. Saturated fatty acids are
used for certain physiological and structural functions, but the body
can make these fatty acids; therefore, there is no dietary
requirement for saturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids contain
some carbon molecules that are joined together by double bonds,
making them more chemically reactive. Fatty acids containing one
double bond are monounsaturated. With two or more double
bonds, a fatty acid is polyunsaturated. Two polyunsaturated fatty
acids are considered essential, meaning that the body cannot make
them: omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids. These two fatty acids are
necessary for the formation of healthy cell membranes, proper
development and functioning of the brain and nervous system, and
hormone production. Omega-6 fatty acids are abundant in the food
supply and found in foods such as soybean, corn, and safflower oil
and products made with these oils. Fewer foods contain omega-3
fatty acids; these include fish, particularly fatty fish such as salmon,
herring, halibut, trout, and mackerel, which contain the omega-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA). Eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA are tied to a dose-
dependent decrease in triglycerides; a small, but statistically
significant, decrease in blood pressure, especially in the elderly; and
potential antiarrhythmic effects (106, 113).
One could also consume flaxseeds, walnuts, soybean oil, or
canola oil to meet omega-3 requirements since these contain the
omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which is
converted to EPA and DHA. However, this conversion process is
inefficient. According to vivo studies, approximately 5% of ALA is
converted to EPA, and <0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA in adults
(129). Therefore, while foods that contain ALA count toward one’s
omega-3 intake, they do not have a substantial effect on EPA and
DHA levels in the body. Foods rich in ALA may improve some risk
567

factors for cardiovascular disease; however, it is not clear which is
responsible—ALA, the other compounds in these nutrient-rich foods,
or a combination of the two (43). In addition to its physiological
functions, fat is important because it is responsible for the
characteristic flavor, aroma, and texture of many foods. Generally,
most dietary fats and oils are a mix of all three types of fatty acids,
with one type predominating. Soy, corn, sunflower, and safflower oils
are relatively high in polyunsaturated fatty acids; olive, peanut, and
canola oils are high in monounsaturated fatty acids; and most animal
fats and tropical oils (e.g., coconut, palm kernel) are relatively high
in saturated fatty acids. See table 10.11 for fat content of common
foods.
When stored in the human body, fat serves many functions.
Energy is stored primarily as adipose tissue in humans, but small
amounts are also found in skeletal muscle, especially in aerobically
trained athletes (142). Body fat insulates and protects organs,
regulates hormones, and carries and stores the fat-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K.
Relationship With Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that is an important
structural and functional component of all cell membranes.
Additionally, cholesterol is used for the production of bile salts,
vitamin D, and several hormones, including the sex hormones
(estrogen, androgen, and progesterone) as well as cortisol. Though
cholesterol has many essential functions in the body, high levels of
cholesterol may lead to atherosclerosis, hardening of the arteries
due to plaque buildup on artery walls, which narrows the area within
arteries through which blood can pass. Therefore, having high levels
of blood cholesterol is a risk factor for heart disease and stroke.
High levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins
(LDL), and triglycerides are all associated with increased risk of
heart disease. Low-density lipoprotein is further divided into
subfractions based on particle size. Smaller, more dense particles,
568

called very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), are more
atherogenic (artery clogging) than larger LDL particles (50). High
levels of saturated or trans fats, weight gain, and anorexia can all
increase LDL cholesterol (159). However, VLDL levels increase with
increasing intake of carbohydrate (116). High levels of high-
density lipoproteins (HDL) are protective against heart disease
but are not a target of therapy (practitioners are told not to focus on
HDL). Table 10.12 shows how LDL, total, and HDL cholesterol are
classified.
High intake of refined carbohydrates, weight gain, excessive
alcohol intake, and very-low-fat diets can increase triglycerides
(blood fats). However, as with cholesterol, several factors affect
triglycerides, including a sedentary lifestyle, overweight or obesity,
smoking, genetics, and certain diseases and medications (126, 159).
For optimal cardiovascular health, and risk reduction of chronic
diseases, the Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidelines
Advisory Committee recommends limiting saturated fat to less than
10% of total calories and replacing saturated fat with unsaturated
fat, particularly polyunsaturated fat. As of June 2018, partially
hydrogenated oils (PHOs), the major source of artificial trans fat in
the food supply, and a major cause of dyslipidemia, are no longer
Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS). Therefore, PHOs are no
longer added to foods. In addition, it is advised that added sugars,
particularly from sugar-sweetened beverages, desserts, sweet
snacks, candies, and sweetened breakfast cereals, are consumed at
a maximum of 10% of total calories (154).
Fat and Performance
Both intramuscular and circulating fatty acids are potential energy
sources during exercise. Compared with the limited capacity of the
body to store carbohydrate, fat stores are large and represent a vast
source of fuel for exercise (20). For example, a lean runner who is
160 pounds (72 kg) with 4% body fat has approximately 22,400
calories stored within fat tissue (57). At rest and during low-intensity
569

exercise, a high percentage of the energy produced is derived from
fatty acid oxidation (137). When the intensity of exercise increases,
there is a gradual shift from fat to carbohydrate as the preferred
source of fuel. Consistent aerobic training increases the muscle’s
capacity to use fatty acids (82). In addition to training, the body
adapts to using greater amounts of fat for energy when a higher-fat,
lower-carbohydrate diet is consumed over a period of time (60, 82).
Because the type of diet to which the body is adapted may influence
performance (69), the effects of high-fat, low-carbohydrate diets
vary, depending on the individual (128, 136, 138).
TABLE 10.11 Fat Content of Common Foods
Food
Serving
size
Serving
size (g)
Total
fat
(g)
Saturated
fat (g)
Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Almond butter
1 tbsp
32
17.7
1.3
10.4
4.3
Almonds,
whole
22 each
26
13.1
1.0
8.3
3.3
Avocado
1/4 each
50
7.3
1.1
4.9
0.9
Beef, ground,
80% lean, pan
browned
3 oz
85
14.8
5.6
6.5
0.4
Beef, sirloin
steak
3 oz
85
13.4
5.3
5.6
0.5
Butter, dairy
1 tbsp
14
11.5
7.3
3.0
0.4
Cashews,
whole, dry
roasted
1/4 cup
34
15.9
3.1
9.4
2.7
Cheese,
cheddar, low-
fat
1 slice
28
2.0
1.2
0.6
0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research
Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal
.usda.gov/.
570

Food
Serving
size
Serving
size (g)
Total
fat
(g)
Saturated
fat (g)
Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Cheese,
mozzarella,
part-skim,
shredded
1/4 cup
28
5.6
3.2
1.6
0.3
Chia seeds
1/4 cup
42
12.9
1.4
1.0
9.9
Chicken, thigh
with skin
3 oz
85
12.5
3.5
5.3
2.5
Coconut oil
1 tbsp
14
13.4
11.2
0.9
0.2
Dark chocolate
1 oz
28
9.1
5.4
2.8
0.3
Egg, large
1
50
5.3
1.6
2.0
0.7
Flaxseed,
ground
1 tbsp
7
3.0
0.3
0.5
2.0
Goat cheese,
soft
1 oz
28
6.0
4.1
1.4
0.2
Margarine,
vegetable oil
spread 40%
1 tbsp
14
5.4
1.3
1.7
2.2
Mayonnaise,
regular
1 tbsp
14
10.3
1.6
2.3
6.2
Milk, skim
1 cup
244
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
Milk, whole,
3.25% fat
1 cup
244
7.9
4.6
2.0
0.5
Oil, canola
1 tbsp
14
14.0
1.0
8.9
3.9
Oil, olive
1 tbsp
14
14.0
1.9
9.9
1.4
Oil, safflower,
70% linoleic
1 tbsp
14
14.0
0.8
1.9
10.1
Oil, soybean
1 tbsp
14
14.0
2.1
3.1
7.9
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research
Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal
.usda.gov/.
571

Food
Serving
size
Serving
size (g)
Total
fat
(g)
Saturated
fat (g)
Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Peanut butter,
natural
2 tbsp
32
16.5
3.3
8.3
4.1
Salmon, filet,
wild, baked
3 oz
85
6.9
1.1
2.3
2.8
Tuna, light,
canned in
water
2 oz
56
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
Trout, filet,
wild, baked
3 oz
85
5.0
1.4
1.5
1.6
Walnuts,
dried, halves
1/4 cup
25
16.3
1.5
2.2
11.8
Yogurt, Greek,
plain, low-fat
1 cup
245
4.7
3.0
1.2
0.2
Yogurt, plain,
low-fat
1 cup
245
3.8
2.5
1.0
0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research
Center. FoodData Central. Available from https://fdc.nal
.usda.gov/.
TABLE 10.12 Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL
Cholesterol
LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<100
Optimal
100-129
Near optimal/above optimal
LDL = low-density lipoprotein; HDL = high-density lipoprotein.
Lipoprotein level testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour fast.
LDL cholesterol is the primary target of therapy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Managing Blood Cholesterol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholesterol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2013).
572

LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
130-159
Borderline high
160-189
High
>190
Very high
Total cholesterol (mg/dl)
<200
Desirable
200-239
Borderline high
>240
High
HDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<40
Low
>60
High
LDL = low-density lipoprotein; HDL = high-density lipoprotein.
Lipoprotein level testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour fast.
LDL cholesterol is the primary target of therapy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Managing Blood Cholesterol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholesterol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2013).
The human body has a sufficient amount of fat to fuel
long training sessions or competition.
Macronutrient Guidelines
Protein
Choose a variety of protein foods, from both animal and plant sources, which
include seafood, lean meat and poultry, eggs, beans, peas and lentils, soy
products, nuts, and seeds.
Increase the amount and variety of seafood consumed by choosing seafood
in place of some meat and poultry.
Choose nuts, seeds, and soy products in place of some meat and poultry.
Aerobic endurance athletes should consume 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day.
573

Strength athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight per day.
Ingest 20 to 40 grams (0.25-0.40 g of protein per kg of body mass) of high-
quality protein every 3 to 4 hours throughout the day.
Carbohydrate
Reduce intake of calories from added sugars.
Increase intake of vegetables (prepared without added salt or fat) and fruit
(prepared without added sugars).
Eat a variety of vegetables, including beans; peas; starchy; and dark-green,
red, and orange vegetables.
Consume at least half of all total grains as whole grains. Individuals who eat
refined grains should choose enriched grains.
Fats and Alcohol
Consume less than 10% of calories from saturated fats by replacing them
with unsaturated fats, particularly polyunsaturated fats.
If alcohol is consumed, it should be consumed in moderation—up to one
drink per day for women and two drinks per day for men—and only by adults
of legal drinking age. Pregnant women should avoid alcohol, and
breastfeeding women should be cautious about their intake if they choose to
drink and speak to their healthcare provider. Alcohol should be avoided in the
time period after exercise because it reduces muscle protein synthesis (124).
574

Vitamins
Vitamins are organic substances (i.e., containing carbon atoms)
needed in very small amounts to perform specific metabolic
functions (71, 166). Vitamins typically act as coenzymes, facilitating
numerous reactions in the body. For instance, B vitamins help the
body make energy from the metabolism of carbohydrates. Table
10.13 describes the functions and some food sources of individual
vitamins.
TABLE 10.13 Vitamins
Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
Vitamin A
Necessary for vision,
healthy skin, teeth,
body tissues, and
healthy mucous
membranes and skin
Animal foods including
animal liver (veal, beef,
goose, lamb, turkey),
meat, fortified milk,
cheese, herring
Males: 300-900 mcg
RAE (retinal activity
equivalents) (RDA)
Females: 300-1,300
mcg RAE (RDA)
Males: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Females: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Beta carotene
An antioxidanta;
converted into vitamin
A in the body
Sweet potato, carrots,
pumpkin, spinach,
collards, kale, winter
squash, lamb quarters,
beet greens, turnip
greens, cabbage
No RDA or AI;
however, 1 IU beta
carotene from food =
0.05 mcg RAE
vitamin A
UL is not
determinable due to
lack of data.
Supplementation is
advised only for
individuals at risk for
vitamin A deficiency.
Vitamin D
Aids calcium
absorption, helps
maintain blood levels
of calcium and
Fish (swordfish, salmon,
tuna, sardines,
mackerel, carp, eel,
whitefish), fortified milk,
Males: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
Females: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
575

Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
phosphorus; necessary
for building bone mass
and preventing bone
loss
fortified breakfast
cereals, egg yolks
Males: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4,000 IU)
(UL)
Females: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4,000 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin E
An antioxidanta;
needed for immune
functioning and
metabolism
Oils (wheat germ,
vegetable), fortified
breakfast cereals, nuts
and seeds, wheat germ,
peanut butter, corn oil
Males: 6-15 mg (7.5-
22.4 IU) (RDA)
Females: 6-19 mg
(9-28.4 IU) (RDA)
Males: 200-1,000 mg
(300-1,500 IU) (UL)
Females: 200-1,000
mg (300-1,500 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin K
(phylloquinone)
Needed for blood
clotting; supports
tissue and bone health
Dark green leafy
vegetables (kale,
Brussels sprouts,
spinach, chard, turnip
and mustard greens,
beet greens, radicchio),
broccoli, asparagus,
lamb quarters
Males: 30-120 mcg
(AI)
Females: 30-90 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Vitamin C
Promotes healthy cell
development, wound
healing, and resistance
to infections. Serves as
an antioxidanta;
necessary for
conversion of the
inactive form of folic
acid to the active form;
makes iron available
for hemoglobin
synthesis.
Sweet peppers,
peaches, guava,
broccoli, kiwifruit, citrus
fruit (strawberries,
oranges, limes, lemons,
grapefruit, tangerine),
papayas, cantaloupe,
tomatoes, potatoes,
onions
Males: 15-90 mg
(RDA)
Females: 15-120 mg
(RDA)
Males: 400-2,000 mg
(UL)
Females: 400-2,000
mg (UL)
Thiamin (B1)
Coenzyme for
carbohydrate
metabolism; needed
for normal functioning
Fortified breakfast
cereals, sunflower
seeds, peas, pork,
oranges, orange juice,
Males: 0.5-1.2 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.4 mg
(RDA)
576

Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
of the nervous system
and muscles, including
the heart
lima beans, pecans,
enriched rice
No UL due to lack of
data
Riboflavin (B2)
Coenzyme in red blood
cell formation; nervous
system functioning;
and metabolism of
carbohydrate, protein,
and fat; needed for
vision and may help
protect against
cataracts
Liver, wheat germ,
brewer’s yeast,
almonds, cheese,
fortified breakfast
cereal, whey protein,
milk, eggs, lamb, pork,
veal, beef, broccoli,
yogurt
Males: 0.5-1.3 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.6 mg
(RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Niacin
Coenzyme for
carbohydrate, protein,
and fat metabolism and
proper nervous system
functioning; high
intakes can lower
elevated cholesterol
Soy protein, soy flour,
textured vegetable
protein, whey protein,
beef, peanuts, peanut
butter, sunflower seeds,
fortified breakfast
cereals
Males: 6-16 mg
(RDA)
Females: 6-18 mg
(RDA)
Males: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Females: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Pyridoxine (B6)
Coenzyme for protein
metabolism and
nervous and immune
system function;
involved in synthesis of
hormones and red
blood cells
Liver, bananas, fortified
breakfast cereals,
soybeans, chicken,
tuna, raw carrots, beef,
broccoli, spinach,
potatoes, alfalfa
sprouts, navy beans,
peanut butter, garbanzo
beans, walnuts,
sunflower seeds,
avocados, eggs, lima
beans, cabbage, salmon
Males: 0.5-1.7 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-2.0 mg
(RDA)
Males: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Females: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Folate
Needed for normal
growth and
development and red
blood cell formation;
reduces risk of neural
tube birth defects; may
reduce risk of heart
Brewer’s yeast, fortified
breakfast cereals, liver,
black-eyed peas, beans
(pinto, black, lima,
white, garbanzo, soy),
peanuts, peanut butter,
spinach, turnip greens,
Males: 150-400 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 150-600
mcg (RDA)
Males: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
577

Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
disease and cervical
dysplasia
asparagus, mustard
greens, seaweed, eggs,
enriched bread,
oranges, orange juice
Females: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
Cobalamin
(B12)
Vital for blood
formation and healthy
nervous system
Liver, oysters, lamb,
eggs, beef, shellfish,
fish, poultry, pork,
chicken, fortified
breakfast cereals
Males: 0.9-2.4 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 0.9-2.8
mcg (RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Biotin
Assists in the
metabolism of fatty
acids and use of B
vitamins
Nuts (peanuts,
hazelnuts, almonds,
cashews, macadamia),
soybeans, peanut
butter, black-eyed peas,
liver, milk, egg yolks,
yeast, cheese,
cauliflower, carrots,
avocados, sweet
potatoes
Males: 8-30 mcg (AI)
Females: 8-35 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Pantothenic
acid
Aids in normal growth
and development
Liver, sunflower seeds,
fortified breakfast
cereals, egg yolks,
whey protein, soy
protein, peanuts,
peanut butter, pecans,
veal, enriched rice,
broccoli, lima beans
Males: 2-5 mg (AI)
Females: 2-7 mg (AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
578

Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
aAntioxidants are substances that modify cell-signaling pathways and counteract oxidative
stress-induced cell damage caused by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (free radicals).
Free radicals are both beneficial and harmful to human health. An overproduction of, or
overexposure to, free radicals combined with a deficiency in antioxidants can result in
oxidative stress and subsequent damage to cellular lipids, proteins, and DNA (71, 166).
bDietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the values
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (71-74).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
Water-soluble vitamins, including the B vitamins and vitamin C,
dissolve in water and are transported in the blood. With the
exception of vitamin B12, which is stored in the liver for years, water-
soluble vitamins are not stored in appreciable amounts in the body;
instead the body uses what is needed and then excretes the
remaining amounts in urine (165). Though there are no known side
effects from excess vitamin B12 consumption, consuming more than
the body can use will not increase energy or improve health (18,
74). Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat soluble and therefore carried by
fat in the blood and stored in fat tissue in the body (109). Excess
preformed vitamin A (not beta carotene, alpha carotene, or beta
cryptoxanthin, which are converted into vitamin A in the body) is
toxic and associated with significant adverse effects including liver
damage, intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri), dizziness,
nausea, headaches, skin irritation, pain in joints and bones, coma,
and even death (23). Excess vitamin A intake can occur through diet
but typically results from high levels of vitamin A in supplements (72,
109). Toxic levels of vitamin D can lead to heart arrhythmias and
increased levels of blood calcium, which can cause blood vessel and
tissue calcification, as well as damage to the heart, blood vessels,
and kidneys (109). Vitamin E acts as an anticoagulant and therefore
579

thins the blood. Regular intake of excessive amounts of vitamin E
can lead to high serum vitamin E levels, which is associated with
increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke, particularly in individuals on
blood thinners (125). Because vitamin K helps blood clot, excess
intake of this vitamin can interfere with the effects of some
anticlotting medications such as warfarin (Coumadin) (94).
Vitamin D is a particular vitamin of interest for both sedentary and
athletic individuals because it is important for immunity, protein
synthesis, muscle function, cardiovascular function, inflammatory
response, cell growth, and regulation of muscle and bone (39, 121).
Many 
people, 
including 
athletes, 
struggle 
to 
meet 
the
recommendations for vitamin D due to few foods being rich sources
of this vitamin (51). According to the Scientific Report of the 2020
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee, more than 90 percent of
men and women over 19 years of age do not consume enough
vitamin D (56, 154). Eating a diet containing seafood, and choosing
foods that are fortified with vitamin D, including milk, fortified soy
beverages, fortified soy yogurt, and some whole-grain cereals, can
help adults meet their needs for vitamin D. In addition to dietary
sources, the body can make vitamin D from the sun through sun
exposure on the skin; however, populations living at higher latitudes
or who spend a lot of time indoors do not have enough sun
exposure to meet vitamin D needs (51). As such, vitamin D
supplementation may be necessary for many individuals to prevent
deficiency. A meta-analysis of 11 randomized control trials and 436
athletes showed that vitamin D supplementation only had a small or
trivial effect on upper and lower body muscular strength or power
(150). Despite lack of a notable performance effect, adequate
vitamin D levels may be important for athletes to protect against
stress fractures and acute illness (35, 39, 91).
580

Minerals
Minerals contribute to the structure of bone, teeth, and nails; are a
component of enzymes; and perform a wide variety of metabolic
functions. For example, calcium is needed for bone and tooth
formation and function, nerve transmission, and muscle contraction.
Iron is necessary for oxygen transport and is also a component of
enzymes necessary for energy metabolism. Calcium; phosphorus;
magnesium; iron; and the electrolytes sodium, potassium, and
chloride are often called the major minerals. For the athlete,
minerals are important for bone health, oxygen-carrying capacity,
and fluid and electrolyte balance. The minerals, their functions, and
good food sources are listed in table 10.14.
TABLE 10.14 Minerals
Mineral
Function
Food sources
DRI and
UL* per
day
Calcium
Essential for developing and
maintaining healthy bones
and teeth; assists with blood
clotting, muscle contraction,
and nerve transmission
Fruit juices and fruit drinks
fortified with calcium, cheese,
sardines, milk, cottage cheese,
yogurt, ice cream, calcium-set
tofu, turnip greens, Chinese
cabbage, mustard greens, kale,
rutabaga
Males:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Females:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Males:
2,000-
3,000 mg
(UL)
Females:
2,000-
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (72, 73).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
581

Mineral
Function
Food sources
DRI and
UL* per
day
3,000 mg
(UL)
Phosphorus
Works with calcium to
develop and maintain strong
bones and teeth; enhances
use of other nutrients;
essential for energy
metabolism, DNA structure,
and cell membranes
Cheese, fish, beef, pork,
whole-wheat products, cocoa
powder, pumpkin seeds,
sunflower seeds, almonds
Males:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Females:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Males: 3-4
g (UL)
Females:
3-4 g (UL)
Magnesium
Activates nearly 100 enzymes
and helps nerves and
muscles function; constituent
of bones and teeth
Bran (wheat and rice), cocoa
powder, fortified breakfast
cereals, seeds (pumpkin,
sunflower), soybeans, nuts
(almonds, pine nuts, hazelnuts,
cashews, walnuts, peanuts),
spinach
Males: 80-
420 mg
(RDA)
Females:
80-400 mg
(RDA)
Males: 65-
350 mg
(UL)
Females:
65-350 mg
(UL)
Molybdenum
Needed for metabolism of
DNA and ribonucleic acid
(RNA) and production of uric
acid
Milk, milk products, peas,
beans, liver, whole-grain
products
Males: 17-
45 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
17-50 mcg
(RDA)
Males:
300-2,000
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (72, 73).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
582

Mineral
Function
Food sources
DRI and
UL* per
day
mcg (UL)
Females:
300-2,000
mcg (UL)
Manganese
Necessary for the normal
development of the skeletal
and connective tissues;
involved in metabolism of
carbohydrates
Wheat germ, wheat bran, rice
bran, fortified breakfast
cereals, rice cakes, nuts
(peanuts, pecans, pine nuts,
walnuts, almonds, hazelnuts),
soybeans, mussels, whole-
wheat products (pastas,
breads, and crackers)
Males: 1.2-
2.3 mg
(AI)
Females:
1.2-2.6 mg
(AI)
Males: 2-
11 mg (UL)
Females:
2-11 mg
(UL)
Copper
Involved in iron metabolism,
nervous system functioning,
bone health, and synthesis of
proteins; plays a role in the
pigmentation of skin, hair,
and eyes
Liver, shellfish (especially
oysters), lobster, nuts
(cashews, Brazil nuts,
hazelnuts, walnuts, peanuts,
almonds, pecans, pistachios),
seeds (sunflower, pumpkin),
fortified breakfast cereals,
great northern beans
Males:
340-900
mcg (RDA)
Females:
340-1,300
mcg (RDA)
Males:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
Females:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (72, 73).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
583

Mineral
Function
Food sources
DRI and
UL* per
day
Chromium
Aids in glucose metabolism
and may help regulate blood
sugar and insulin levels in
people with diabetes
Mushrooms (white), raw
oysters, wine, apples, brewer’s
yeast, beer, pork, chicken
Males: 11-
35 mcg
(AI)
Females:
11-45 mcg
(AI)
No UL due
to lack of
data
Iodine
Part of the thyroid hormone;
helps regulate growth,
development, and energy
metabolism
Iodized salt, saltwater fish and
seafood
Males: 90-
150 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
90-290
mcg (RDA)
Males:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Females:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Iron
Necessary for red blood cell
formation and function;
constituent of myoglobin and
component of enzyme
systems
Liver, beef, lamb, pork, veal,
poultry, clams, oysters, fortified
breakfast cereals, enriched
bread products, brewer’s yeast,
nuts (pine nuts, cashews,
almonds), beans (kidney,
green, garbanzo)
Males: 7-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
7-27 mg
(RDA)
Males: 40-
45 mg (UL)
Females:
40-45 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (72, 73).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
584

Mineral
Function
Food sources
DRI and
UL* per
day
Selenium
Essential component of a key
antioxidant enzyme;
necessary for normal growth
and development and for use
of iodine in thyroid function
Tenderloin of beef, pollock,
trout, tuna, oysters, mackerel,
flounder, liver, sunflower seeds,
wheat bran, wheat germ, some
pork, fortified breakfast
cereals, perch, crab, clams,
cod, haddock, whole-wheat
breads
Males: 20-
55 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
20-70 mcg
(RDA)
Males: 90-
400 mcg
(UL)
Females:
90-400
mcg (UL)
Zinc
Essential part of more than
100 enzymes involved in
digestion, metabolism,
reproduction, and wound
healing
Oysters, beef, veal, lamb, pork,
chicken, lima beans, black-
eyed peas, white beans
Males: 3-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
3-13 mg
(RDA)
Males: 7-
40 mg (UL)
Females:
7-40 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (72, 73).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
Two minerals, iron and calcium, deserve additional attention.
Athletes who do not consume enough dietary iron can develop iron
deficiency or iron deficiency anemia, both of which can impair
performance. Inadequate dietary calcium can contribute to low bone
density and possibly future risk of developing osteopenia or
osteoporosis.
585

Iron
Iron is essential for both the functioning and synthesis of
hemoglobin, a protein that transfers oxygen throughout the body
(158). In addition, iron is a component of the protein myoglobin,
which transports oxygen to muscles (63). This mineral plays
important roles in growth, development, cell functioning, and the
synthesis and functioning of some hormones (30, 160).
Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia is a major public health
concern worldwide, mainly affecting women and children (40).
Though it disproportionately affects those in developing countries, it
is common in industrialized countries as well. The National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2015-16 found
that approximately 11% of American females aged 12 to 49 had iron
deficiency, with the goal to reduce that level to 7.2% (99). (In
studies examining iron deficiency in female athletes, more than 25%
tested positive for iron deficiency [65, 102].) Iron deficiency occurs
in three stages (in order of severity): depletion, marginal deficiency,
and anemia (90, 117). Iron carries oxygen to the working muscles,
and even marginal iron deficiency may impair athletic performance
(19, 63). Iron deficiency anemia develops when low iron stores
persist for a period of time and the body cannot make enough
healthy red blood cells to deliver oxygen throughout the body (158).
Symptoms depend on the individual; some people are asymptomatic
or get used to their symptoms and assume that they are normal.
Symptoms of iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia may include
weakness, fatigue, irritability, poor concentration, headache,
decreased exercise capacity, hair loss, and dry mouth (15). Other
symptoms associated with iron deficiency anemia include feeling cold
often, inflamed tongue (glossitis), shortness of breath during routine
activities, and pica (the desire to eat nonfood substances such as
laundry starch, dirt, clay, and ice) (52). Iron deficiency has also been
shown to negatively affect mental health and contribute to
depression (30, 99).
586

Women of childbearing age, teenage girls, pregnant women,
infants, and toddlers have the greatest need for iron and therefore
an increased risk of becoming deficient. In addition, distance
runners, vegetarian athletes, female athletes, those who lose a
significant amount of blood during their menstrual cycle, people who
take excessive amounts of antacids, and people with certain
digestive diseases such as celiac disease have an increased risk of
developing iron deficiency anemia (72).
The two types of iron found in food are heme and nonheme iron.
Heme iron, derived from hemoglobin, is found in foods that originally
contained hemoglobin and myoglobin—animal foods including red
meats, fish, and poultry. Heme iron is absorbed better than
nonheme iron, and absorption is not affected by anything else we
eat. Approximately 15% to 35% of the heme iron consumed is
actually absorbed (112).
Nonheme iron is the form of iron found in all other, non-meat
foods including vegetables, grains, and iron-fortified breakfast
cereal. Only 2% to 20% of nonheme iron is absorbed (160). While
heme iron is not affected by compounds found in food eaten
concurrently, many factors affect the absorption of nonheme iron.
For instance, the nonheme iron in spinach is bound to a substance
called phytic acid, the storage form of phosphorus in plants. Phytic
acid decreases the absorption of nonheme iron. In addition, several
other substances may decrease the absorption of nonheme iron,
including tannins (found in tea and wine), calcium (found in dairy
and multivitamins), polyphenols, phytates (found in legumes and
whole grains), and some of the proteins in soy. A person can
increase the amount of nonheme iron absorbed by consuming
vitamin C–rich foods or beverages at the same time or consuming a
nonheme source at the same time heme iron is consumed. For
example, pairing spinach with meat increases iron absorption from
spinach (72, 160).
There are many supplemental forms of iron; each supplies a
different amount of elemental iron while also varying in
587

bioavailability and the potential for side effects such as stomach
upset (103, 157). Ferrous iron has a high bioavailability and is most
recommended; it is often paired with vitamin C, which enhances iron
absorption (157). It is recommended to take iron supplements on an
empty stomach, at least an hour before meals, because many foods,
drinks, and other dietary supplements can interfere with iron
absorption. For example, whole grains, coffee, black tea, red wine,
and hot chocolate can impair iron absorption. Additionally, both
calcium and supplemental magnesium may interfere with iron
absorption (169). Because of the many factors affecting iron intake
and absorption, including intake of other minerals the athlete may
not be consuming in adequate quantities, only a medical doctor or
registered dietitian should recommend iron supplements and how to
take an iron supplement for maximum absorption and minimal
stomach upset (157).
Calcium
Adequate calcium intake throughout childhood and adolescence is
essential for the development of strong bones. Calcium helps bones
grow in length and density during adolescence, with up to 90% of
peak bone mineral density occurring during late adolescence (61). In
adults, calcium helps maintain bone density. When dietary calcium
intake falls short, calcium is pulled from its storage site in bone to
meet the demands of the body and keep calcium concentrations in
the blood, muscle, and intercellular fluids constant. Calcium is
essential for attaining peak bone mass, and calcium deficiencies can
impair the attainment of peak bone mineral density and increase risk
of fracture later in life (109). Calcium also keeps teeth strong, helps
regulate muscle contraction, and plays a role in nerve functioning,
blood vessel expansion and contraction, and hormone and enzyme
secretion (109).
The NHANES found that just 15% of 9- to 13-year-old females
and less than 10% of females aged 14 to 18 and over the age of 51
met the adequate intake (AI) for calcium from diet alone (11).
588

Therefore, athletes should be encouraged to include dairy products
and other calcium-rich foods in their diets. The athlete’s medical
doctor or registered dietitian may suggest a calcium supplement if
calcium needs cannot be met through diet alone.
Caloric Versus Nutrient-Dense Foods
Given the rise in obesity in America, some classify the American diet as calorie
dense but nutrient poor. The Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidelines
Advisory Committee recommends a dietary pattern including a variety of nutrient-
dense foods. Though there is no standardized definition of the term nutrient
density, in general, choosing nutrient-dense foods means looking for foods based
on the nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and fiber, as well as the healthy plant-
based compounds that they provide, whereas caloric density refers to the caloric
content of a food. Foods high in nutrient density include milk, vegetables, protein
foods, and grains, while foods high in caloric density but low in nutrient density
typically include potato chips, desserts, and candy (44). For more information on
nutrient versus caloric density, the reader is referred to the work of Drewnowski
(44).
589

Fluid and Electrolytes
Water is the largest component of the body, representing 45% to
75% of a person’s body weight (75). In the human body, water acts
as a lubricant, shock absorber, building material, and solvent.
Additionally, water is essential for body temperature regulation
(water loss through sweat helps cool off skin, particularly in hot
environments and during exercise), nutrient transport and waste
product removal, and maintaining fluid balance and therefore normal
blood pressure (81). Water is so important that even under optimal
temperature conditions, the body can survive only a few days
without water.
While maintaining adequate hydration is important for all
individuals, athletes must pay close attention to their hydration
status since sweat losses that exceed fluid intake can quickly lead to
a hypohydrated state with a subsequent increase in core body
temperature, decrease in blood plasma volume, and increase in
heart rate and perceived exertion (32, 139). When this happens,
sweat output cannot keep up with increases in core body
temperature unless fluids are given. Repeated exercise in hot
environments helps the body adapt to heat stress (e.g., greater
sweat volume, lower electrolyte concentration of sweat, and lower
temperature for the onset of sweating), and therefore athletes may
be more prone to dehydration and heat stress at the beginning of
the season (54). In addition, athletes with less training may be more
prone to heat stress than trained athletes (32). Due to physiological
changes that alter water conservation in the body as well as age-
related decline in fluid intake, the elderly have an increased risk of
dehydration and hypohydration (32). Children may have a greater
risk of dehydration as well, resulting from increased heat gain from
the environment due to greater surface area–body mass ratio
compared to adults, increased heat production during exercise,
decreased ability to dissipate heat through sweat, and a decreased
sensation of thirst compared to adults (12, 46). Additionally, those
590

with sickle cell trait, cystic fibrosis, and some other diseases have an
increased risk of becoming dehydrated (12, 163). Even mild
dehydration, representing 2% to 3% weight loss, can increase core
body temperature and significantly affect athletic performance by
increasing fatigue and decreasing motivation, neuromuscular control,
accuracy, power, strength, muscular endurance, and overall
performance (13, 26, 42, 58, 84, 85, 141, 153). Dehydration can
increase core body temperature, reduce stroke volume and cardiac
output, decrease blood pressure, reduce blood flow to muscles,
increase 
heartbeat, 
exacerbate 
symptomatic 
exertional
rhabdomyolysis, and increase risk of heatstroke and death (3, 32,
108). One’s risk for dehydration, and subsequent heat stress, is
greater in hot, humid environments and at altitude (27, 108, 146).
Fluid Balance
Fluid balance is the balance between water intake from food,
drinks, and metabolic water and water output through expired air,
insensible perspiration, sweat, feces, and urine. It is important for a
person to consume adequate sources of water to prevent
dehydration from excess water loss. The AI for water is 3.7 liters
(125.1 fl oz or 15.6 cups) and 2.7 L (91.3 fl oz or 11.4 cups) per day,
respectively, for men and women. However, the AI for pregnant and
lactating women is 3 liters (101.4 fl oz or 12.7 cups) and 3.8 liters
(128.5 fl oz or 16.1 cups) per day, respectively. All sources of fluid,
including beverages such as coffee, tea, juice, and soda, as well as
the fluid in foods, contribute to meeting a person’s water needs from
dietary sources (75).
Maintaining fluid balance during training and competition can be a
challenge for many athletes, particularly those who sweat profusely
or train in hot, humid environments or at altitude. In addition to
environmental conditions, clothing, equipment, and larger body size
can increase sweat rate, while unsafe weight loss practices such as
frequent use or overuse of diuretics or laxatives can increase risk of
dehydration (32, 38). American football players, particularly linemen,
591

have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated because of their
equipment and, in many cases, larger body size (32). For example, a
study in National Football League players found that backs and
receivers, with an average body mass of 93 ± 6 kilograms (205.0 ±
13.2 lb), lost an average of 1.4 ± 0.45 liters (47.3 ± 15.2 fl oz; or
approximately 6 ± 2 cups) of sweat per hour, while linemen, with an
average body mass of 135.6 ± 17 kilograms (298.9 ± 37.5 lb), lost
an average 2.25 ± 0.68 liters (76.1 ± 23.0 fl oz; approximately 9.5
± 2.9 cups) of sweat per hour during practice. Calculated sweat
losses for both groups during a total of 4.5 hours of practice on days
with two practice sessions were 6.4 ± 2.0 liters (216.4 ± 67.6 fl oz;
approximately 27.1 ± 8.5 cups) for backs and receivers and 10.1 ±
3.1 liters (341.5 ± 104.8 fl oz; 42.7 ± 13.1 cups) for linemen (55).
Multiple layers of clothing and protective equipment contribute to
sweat losses and dehydration risk in hockey players (14), while
intentional dehydration and other unsafe weight loss practices can
increase dehydration risk in wrestlers (170). In addition, it is
important to note that a very wide range of fluid losses through
sweat exists. For instance, National Basketball Association players
lost from 1.0 to 4.6 liters (33.8-155.5 fl oz; 4.2-19.4 cups) and had a
mean loss of 2.2 ± 0.8 liters (74.4 ± 27.1 fl oz; 9.3 ± 3.4 cups) of
sweat over the course of a 40-minute game in which the average
playing time was 21 ± 8 minutes (120). To reduce the risk of
dehydration and heat stress, athletes should avoid exercising under
extremely hot, humid conditions and should adequately replace fluid
losses from prolonged exertion.
Preventing Dehydration
Given the negative effects associated with dehydration, athletes
should try to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body
weight while also restoring electrolytes lost through sweat (3, 139).
The first step to preventing dehydration is to assess hydration status
(table 10.15). Urine specific gravity (USG) can be used to assess
hydration status because the test is easy to use, inexpensive, and
592

portable (168). However, USG is not a sensitive indicator of acute
changes in hydration; instead it is better as a measure of chronic
hydration status (120, 131). A quick and simple method for
estimating hydration status involves measuring changes in body
weight from before to after a workout. Athletes should weigh
themselves in minimal, lightweight clothing, after drying off and
urinating, immediately before and after their workout. Sweaty
clothes should be removed before weighing. Each pound (0.45 kg)
lost during practice represents 16 ounces (0.47 L) of fluid. A loss of
2% or more of body weight indicates the athlete is not adequately
replacing fluid lost through sweat (3). In addition to identifying acute
dehydration from one workout, assessing weight changes over time
may help identify athletes who are chronically dehydrated—those
who lose several pounds over the course of a few days (24). See
table 10.15 for biomarkers of proper or sufficient hydration.
TABLE 10.15 Biomarkers of Hydration Status
Measure
Practicality
Validity (acute vs. chronic
changes)
EUH cutoff
Total body water
Low
Acute and chronic
<2%
Plasma osmolality
Medium
Acute and chronic
<290 mOsm
Urine specific gravity High
Chronic
<1.020 g/mL
Urine osmolality
High
Chronic
<700 mOsm
Body weight
High
Acute and chronic*
<1%
Note: EUH = euhydration.
*Potentially confounded by changes in body composition during very prolonged
assessment periods.
Reprinted by permission from American College of Sports Medicine, M.N. Sawka, L.M.
Burke, et al., “American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand: Exercise and Fluid
Replacement,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39, no. 2 (2007): 377-390.
In addition to identifying athletes who do not adequately hydrate,
one can calculate sweat rate, thereby giving a better idea of fluid
needs during exercise, by weighing athletes before exercise and
593

again after an intense 1-hour practice session while also measuring
fluid intake and urine volume produced. Sweat rate is equal to
preexercise body weight minus postexercise body weight + fluid
intake during exercise − urine produced (14, 24). Assessments of
urine quantity, through USG or urine volume, may be misleading
during the immediate rehydration period after dehydration. When
athletes consume large quantities of hypotonic fluid, they produce
copious amounts of urine long before they become adequately
hydrated (147, 148).
In addition to monitoring weight changes, athletes are sometimes
advised to check their urine color. However, the relationship between
urine color and hydration status is very subjective (3, 108). Also,
beets, blackberries, certain food colors, and medications can turn
urine pink, red, or light brown (9). In addition, B vitamins,
carotenoids (such as beta carotene), and some medications can turn
urine dark yellow, bright yellow, or orange, while artificial food colors
(such as those found in some sport drinks) may also turn urine blue
or green (9).
A very wide range of fluid losses, in the form of sweat,
exists among athletes. Therefore each athlete should
develop an individualized hydration plan.
Electrolytes
The major electrolytes lost in sweat include sodium chloride and, to
a lesser extent and in order, potassium, magnesium, and calcium
(89). Sodium influences fluid regulation by helping retain more of
the fluid consumed (107). In addition, all of the electrolytes lost
through sweat are essential to muscle contraction and nerve
conduction. Thus, any disturbance in the balance of electrolytes in
body fluids could potentially interfere with performance. Sodium
losses through sweat vary tremendously between athletes, with
reported concentrations ranging from 0.2 to greater than 12.5 g/L
(10 to over 544 mEq/L) (3, 32). Given the large quantity of sodium
594

some athletes lose through sweat, replacing sodium losses may
require a conscious decision to choose higher-sodium foods, salt
their food, and add electrolytes to their sport drinks. Athletes who
exercise intensely or for hours and hydrate excessively with only
water or a no- or low-sodium beverage may dilute their blood
sodium levels to dangerously low levels—below 130 mmol/L—a
condition called hyponatremia. This leads to intracellular swelling,
and, when blood sodium levels fall below 125 mmol/L, to headaches,
nausea, vomiting, muscle cramps, swollen hands and feet,
restlessness, and disorientation. When blood sodium drops below
120 mmol/L, risk of developing cerebral edema, seizures, coma,
brain stem herniation, respiratory arrest, and risk of death increase
(2, 3, 6). To avoid hyponatremia, fluid intake should not exceed
sweat losses (athletes should not weigh more after they finish
exercising than they did at the start of their training session), and
athletes should consume sodium through either sport drinks or food
(3, 120).
Sport drinks provide small amounts of potassium to replace sweat
potassium losses. However, they are not a significant contributor to
total potassium intake. Because research shows that less than 2% of
adults in the United States meet the dietary recommendations for
potassium (31), athletes should focus on consuming more
potassium-rich foods in their diet, such as tomatoes, citrus fruits,
melons, potatoes, bananas, and milk.
Athletes who exercise intensely or for hours and hydrate
excessively with only water or a no- or low-sodium
beverage may dilute their blood sodium to dangerously
low levels.
Fluid Intake Guidelines
Ideally, athletes should start exercise or training in a hydrated state,
avoid losing more than 2% of body weight (due to sweat losses)
during exercise, and rehydrate completely after exercise and before
595

the next training session. The amount of fluid necessary to fully
achieve rehydration depends on the time period before the next bout
of training. However, studies show that some athletes start practice
or competition in a hypohydrated state, making it more difficult to
consume enough fluid during the exercise session to make up for
poor preexercise hydration status (120, 134). Additionally, athletes
with significant sweat losses may not voluntarily drink enough fluid
to adequately rehydrate and prevent dehydration during training and
competition. A systematic approach to fluid replacement is necessary
for this reason and also because thirst may not be a reliable
indicator of fluid needs for athletes who are heavy sweaters or those
who are practicing intensely in hot environmental conditions (24).
Though fluid and electrolyte guidelines should be individualized as
much as possible, given the wide range of fluid and electrolyte
losses in athletes, the general guidelines presented next are a good
starting place with athletes until specific recommendations can be
provided based on sweat rate (6). Additionally, strength and
conditioning professionals should ensure that athletes are given
adequate time to drink and access to cool fluids (10-15 °C [50-59
°F]) (82).
Before Activity
Prehydrate, if necessary, several hours before exercise to allow for
fluid absorption and urine output (3).
During Activity
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electrolyte concentrations,
athletes should measure weight changes during training and
competition in specific weather conditions and develop individualized
hydration strategies based on this information (3). During prolonged
activity in hot weather, the IOM recommends sport drinks containing
20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per
liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (70). Additionally,
596

when a sport drink is ingested at high rates during intense or
prolonged exercise, athletes may want to choose one that contains
multiple types of carbohydrates with different intestinal transport
mechanisms, such as glucose, fructose, and maltodextrin. Ingestion
of multiple types of carbohydrate versus a single carbohydrate will
lead to greater gastric emptying, carbohydrate absorption, oxidation,
and possibly better performance (36, 83). All beverages provided
should be cool—10-15 °C (50-59 °F)—but not cold (24).
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends periodic
drinking be enforced in children. These guidelines suggest that
children weighing 88 pounds (40 kg) drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes during
practice and that adolescents weighing 132 pounds (60 kg) drink 9
ounces (266 mL) even if they do not feel thirsty. Another
recommendation is a sodium chloride concentration of 15 to 20
mmol/L (1 g per 2 pints), which has been shown to increase
voluntary hydration by 90% when compared to unflavored water
(34, 171).
After Activity
After exercise, athletes should replace fluid and electrolyte losses. If
time permits, normal meals, snacks (provided that they contain
some sodium), and water will restore fluid and electrolyte losses.
Additional salt can be added to foods when sweat sodium losses are
substantial (3, 75). If dehydration is significant, or the athlete has a
short recovery period before the next bout of exercise (<12 h), a
more aggressive approach is warranted: Athletes should consume
approximately 1.5 L (51 ounces) of fluid (with sufficient electrolytes)
for each kilogram of body weight loss (0.7 L or 24 oz or 3 cups for
each pound of body weight). This amount of fluid helps account for
increased urine production stemming from the consumption of a
large volume of fluid (3, 147).
597

Fluid Intake Guidelines at a Glance
Before Training
Athletes should have a USG reading <1.02. They should prehydrate, if
necessary, several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and
urine output (3).
During a Training Session
Children and Adolescents
Children weighing 88 pounds (40 kg) should drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of cold
water or a flavored, salted beverage every 20 minutes during training (34).
Adolescents weighing 132 pounds (60 kg) should drink 9 ounces (266 mL) of
cold water or a flavored, salted beverage every 20 minutes (171).
Adults
Athletes should follow an individualized hydration plan. During prolonged
activity in hot weather, they should consume a sport drink containing 20 to
30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5
mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and carbohydrate in a concentration
of 5% to 10%.
After Training
Athletes should consume adequate food and fluids, as well as sodium, to
restore hydration. If dehydration is significant or the athlete has <12 hours
before the next exercise bout, a more aggressive approach is warranted and
the athlete should consume approximately 1.5 liters (51 oz) of fluid (with
sufficient electrolytes) for each kilogram of body weight lost (0.7 L or 24 oz
or 3 cups for each pound of body weight).
598

Conclusion
Nutrition plays an important role in strength and conditioning.
Adequate hydration and electrolytes; appropriate energy intake; and
adequate protein, carbohydrate, fat, vitamin, and mineral intakes
allow athletes to reap maximal benefits from training. A general
understanding of nutrition principles and applications is essential for
strength and conditioning professionals so that they can help
athletes sort through nutrition misinformation and provide sound
guidelines that athletes can use to improve their diets.
KEY TERMS
Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Range (AMDR)
Adequate Intake (AI)
amino acids
anemia
bioavailability
carbohydrate
cholesterol
dehydration
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs)
disaccharides
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
electrolytes
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)
fat
fatty acids
fiber
fluid balance
fructose
galactose
gluconeogenesis
599

glucose
glycemic index (GI)
glycemic load
glycogen
glycogenesis
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
hydration
hypohydration
hyponatremia
lactose
low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
macronutrient
maltose
micronutrient
minerals
monosaccharides
monounsaturated
muscle protein synthesis
MyPlate
nutrient density
omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA)
polypeptide
polysaccharides
polyunsaturated
protein
protein digestibility
protein digestibility correct amino acid score (PDCAAS)
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA)
saturated
sports dietitian
sucrose
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)
triglycerides
vegan
600

very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL)
vitamins
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is the player development staff member
who has the most accurate nutrition knowledge and is best to
counsel athletes with complex nutritional needs?
  a.  athletic trainer
  b.  strength and conditioning professional
  c.  sports dietitian
  d.  physical therapist
  2.  Which of the following food groups are illustrated in the
MyPlate icon?
  a.  oils, proteins, water, fiber, vitamins, and minerals
  b.  protein foods, fruits, vegetables, grains, and dairy
  c.  proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and water
  d.  macronutrients, micronutrients, water
  3.  Which of the following is the recommended intake of protein
for athletes?
  a.  0.7 to 0.8 grams protein per kilogram body weight per day
  b.  0.8 to 1.0 grams protein per kilogram body weight per day
  c.  1.2 to 1.4 grams protein per kilogram body weight per day
  d.  1.2 to 2.0 grams protein per kilogram body weight per day
  4.  For optimal health, which of the following is the recommended
amount of added sugars in the diet?
  a.  less than 5% of total calories
  b.  less than 10% of total calories
  c.  more than 15% of total calories
  d.  more than 20% of total calories
  6.  Which of the following actions should athletes take to assess
fluid losses after exercise?
  a.  check urine color
  b.  check their body temperature
601

  c.  weigh themselves before and after exercise
  d.  measure how much water they drank during exercise
TABLE 10.1 Food Group Recommendations From
MyPlate
Population
and age
range
Estimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fita
Fruitb Vegetablesc
Grainsd
Protein
foodse
Dairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Children 2-3
1,000
1-1.5
cups
1 to 1.5 cups
3-5 oz
equivalents
(1.5-2.5
cups)
24 oz
equivalents
2-2.5 cups
4-8
1,200-
1,400
1-2
cups
1.5-2.5 cups
4-6 oz
equivalents
(2-3 cups)
3-5.5 oz
equivalents
2.5 cups
Girls
9-
13
1,600
1.5-2
cups
1.5-3 cups
5-7 oz
equivalents
(2.5-3.5
cups)
4-6 oz
equivalents
3 cups
14-
18
1,800
1.5-2
cups
2.5-3 cups
6-8 oz
equivalents
(3-4 cups)
5-6.5 oz
equivalents
3 cups
Boys
9-
13
1,800
1.5-2
cups
2-3.5 cups
5-9 oz
equivalents
(2.5-4.5
cups)
5-6.5 oz
equivalents
3 cups
14-
18
2,200
2-2.5
cups
2.5-4 cups
6-10 oz
equivalents
(3-5 cups)
5.5-7 oz
equivalents
3 cups
Females 19-
30
2,000
1.5-2
cups
2.5-3 cups
6-8 oz
equivalents
(3-4 cups)
5-6.5 oz
equivalents
3 cups
602

Population
and age
range
Estimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fita
Fruitb Vegetablesc
Grainsd
Protein
foodse
Dairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
31-
59
1,800
1.5-2
cups
2-3 cups
5-7 oz
equivalents
(2.5-3.5
cups)
5-6 oz
equivalents
3 cups
60+ 1,600
1.5-2
cups
2-3 cups
5-7 oz
equivalents
(2.5-3.5
cups)
5-6 oz
equivalents
3 cups
Males
19-
30
2,400
2-2.5
cups
3-4 cups
8-10 oz
equivalents
(4 to 5
cups)
6.5-7 oz
equivalents
3 cups
31-
59
2,200
2-2.5
cups
3-4 cups
7-10 oz
equivalents
(3.5-5
cups)
6-7 oz
equivalents
3 cups
60+ 2,000
2
cups
2.5-3.5 cups
6-9 oz
equivalents
(3-4.5
cups)
5.5-6.5 oz
equivalents
3 cups
603

Population
and age
range
Estimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fita
Fruitb Vegetablesc
Grainsd
Protein
foodse
Dairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
The amount needed from each group depends on age, sex, height, weight, and level of
physical activity. The amount can also depend on whether the individual is pregnant or
breastfeeding. General recommendations by age are shown in the chart.
aThese amounts are appropriate for individuals who get less than 30 minutes of moderate
physical activity most days. Those who are more physically active may be able to consume
more while staying within the daily caloric need. To find an individual’s daily caloric need,
go to www.myplate.gov/myplate-plan.
bSee table 10.2 for MyPlate Cup of Fruit Table.
cSee table 10.3 for MyPlate Cup of Vegetables Table.
dSee table 10.4 for MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Grains Table.
eSee table 10.5 for MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Proteins Table.
fSee table 10.6 for MyPlate Cup of Dairy Table.
Fruit. In general, 1 cup of fruit or 100% fruit juice or 1/2 cup of dried fruit can be
considered as 1 cup from the Fruit Group.
Vegetables. Any vegetable or 100% vegetable juice counts as a member of the Vegetable
Group. Vegetables may be raw or cooked; fresh, frozen, canned, or dried-dehydrated; and
may be whole, cut up, or mashed. Vegetables in their nutrient-dense forms have limited
additions such as salt, butter, or creamy sauces.
Grains. Any food made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley, or another cereal grain is a
grain product. Bread, pasta, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits are examples of grain
products. Foods such as popcorn, rice, and oatmeal are included in the grains group. Half
of one’s grains should be whole grains. Whole grains have the entire kernel, which includes
the bran, germ, and endosperm. Some whole grain examples are whole-wheat flour, bulgur,
oatmeal, and brown rice.
Protein foods. All foods made from meat, poultry, seafood, beans and peas, eggs,
processed soy products, nuts, and seeds are considered part of the Protein Foods Group.
Beans and peas are also part of the Vegetable Group. In general, 1 ounce of meat, poultry,
or fish; 1/4 cup cooked beans; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon of peanut butter; 1/2 ounce of nuts or
seeds; 1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tofu; or 1 ounce of tempeh, cooked, can be considered as 1
ounce-equivalent from the Protein Foods Group. Many Americans get the right amount of
protein needed from meat, poultry, and eggs but do not meet the recommendations for
seafood or nuts, seeds, and soy products. Meeting this can help increase the amount of
important nutrients the body needs, like unsaturated fats, dietary fiber, and vitamin D.
604

Population
and age
range
Estimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fita
Fruitb Vegetablesc
Grainsd
Protein
foodse
Dairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Dairy. The Dairy Group includes milk, yogurt, cheese, lactose-free milk and fortified soy
milk, and yogurt. Foods made from milk that have little to no calcium and a high fat
content, such as cream cheese, cream, and butter, are not considered dairy foods.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
TABLE 10.2 MyPlate Cup of Fruit Table
Fruit
Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Apple
1 small or 1/2 large apple
1 cup, sliced or chopped, fresh
2/3 cup, baked
1/2 cup, dried
Applesauce
1 cup applesauce
Banana
1 large banana
1 cup, sliced
2/3 cup, mashed
Blueberries
1 cup, fresh or frozen
1/3 cup, dried
Cantaloupe
1 cup, diced or melon balls
Grapes
22 seedless grapes
1 cup, whole or cut up
Grapefruit
1 medium grapefruit
1 cup, sections
Kiwifruit
2 to 3 kiwifruits
1 cup, sliced or chopped
Mango
7 slices or chunks, fresh or frozen
1 cup, fresh or frozen
1/3 cup, dried
U.S. Department of Agriculture
605

Fruit
Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Mixed fruit (fruit cocktail)
1 cup, diced or sliced, fresh or canned, drained
Orange
1 large orange
1 cup, sections
Peach
1 large peach
1 cup, sliced or diced, fresh, cooked, frozen or
canned, drained
2 halves, canned
Pear
1 medium pear
1 cup, sliced or diced, fresh, cooked, or canned,
drained
Pineapple
1 cup, chunks, sliced or crushed, fresh, cooked
or canned, drained
Plum
3 medium or 2 large plums
1 cup, sliced, fresh or cooked
1/2 cup, dried (prunes)
Strawberries
About 8 large strawberries
1 cup, whole, halved, or sliced, fresh or frozen
Watermelon
1 small wedge or slice
1 cup, diced or melon balls
Dried fruit (e.g., raisins, prunes,
apricots, figs)
1/2 cup dried fruit
100% fruit juice (e.g., orange, apple,
grape, grapefruit)
1 cup
U.S. Department of Agriculture
TABLE 10.3 MyPlate Cup of Vegetable Table
Vegetable
group
Vegetable
Amount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Dark green
vegetables
Broccoli
1 cup, chopped or
florets, fresh or
frozen
U.S. Department of Agriculture
606

Vegetable
group
Vegetable
Amount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Amaranth leaves, beet greens, Bok choy, broccoli
rabe (rapini), chard, collards (collard greens), cress,
dandelion greens, kale, mustard greens, spinach,
Swiss chard, watercress
1 cup, cooked
2 cups, fresh
Raw leafy greens: arugula (rocket), basil, cilantro,
dark green leafy lettuce, endive, escarole, mixed
greens, mesclun, romaine
2 cups, fresh
Red and
orange
vegetables
Carrots
2 medium carrots
1 cup, sliced or
chopped, fresh,
cooked or frozen
1 cup baby carrots
Pumpkin, calabaza
1 cup, mashed,
cooked
Red and orange bell peppers
1 large bell pepper
1 cup, chopped,
fresh, or cooked
Sweet potato
1 large sweet
potato, baked
1 cup, sliced or
mashed, cooked
Tomatoes
1 large tomato
2 small tomatoes
1 cup, chopped or
sliced, fresh,
canned, or cooked
100% vegetable juice
1 cup
Winter squash (acorn, butternut, Hubbard,
kabocha)
1 cup, cubed,
cooked
Beans, peas,
and lentils
Dry beans and peas and lentils (bayo, black, brown,
fava, garbanzo, kidney, lima, mung, navy, pigeon,
pink, pinto, soy, or white beans; black-eyed peas
1 cup, whole or
mashed, cooked
U.S. Department of Agriculture
607

Vegetable
group
Vegetable
Amount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
[cow peas] or split peas; and red, brown, and
green lentils)
Starchy
vegetables
Cassava
3/4 cup, cooked
Corn, yellow or white
1 large ear of corn
1 cup corn kernels,
fresh or frozen
Green peas
1 cup, fresh or
frozen
Plantains
3/4 cup, cooked
White potatoes
1 medium white
potato, boiled or
baked
1 cup, diced,
mashed, fresh or
frozen
Other
vegetables
Asparagus
1 cup
Avocado
1 avocado
Bean sprouts
1 cup, cooked
Cabbage, green, red, napa, savoy
1 cup, chopped or
shredded raw or
cooked
Cauliflower
1 cup, pieces or
florets raw or
cooked, fresh or
frozen
Celery
1 cup, diced or
sliced, raw or
cooked
2 large stalks (11"
to 12" long)
Cucumbers
1 cup, raw, sliced or
chopped
U.S. Department of Agriculture
608

Vegetable
group
Vegetable
Amount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Green or wax beans
1 cup, raw or
cooked
Green bell peppers
1 large bell pepper
1 cup, chopped, raw
or cooked, fresh or
frozen
Lettuce, iceberg or head
2 cups, raw,
shredded or
chopped
Mushrooms
1 cup, raw or
cooked
Okra
1 cup, cooked
Onions
1 cup, chopped, raw
or cooked
Summer squash or zucchini
1 cup, cooked,
sliced or diced
U.S. Department of Agriculture
TABLE 10.4 MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Grains
Table
Grain
Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bagels
2" mini bagel
Bagel or pita chips
1/3 cup bagel or pita chips
Barley
1/2 cup, cooked
Buckwheat
1/2 cup, cooked
Breads
1 regular slice of bread
1 small slice of French bread
4 snack-size slices of rye bread
U.S. Department of Agriculture
609

Grain
Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bulgur
1/2 cup, cooked
Challah bread
1 medium or regular sliced
Cornbread
1 small piece
Couscous
1/2 cup, cooked
Crackers
5 whole wheat crackers
2 rye crisp breads
7 square or round crackers
English muffins
1/2 English muffin
Muffins
1 small muffin
Oatmeal
1/2 cup, cooked
1 packet instant
1 oz (1/3 cup) dry (regular or quick)
Pancakes
1 pancake (4-1/2" diameter)
2 small pancakes (3" diameter)
Pasta (spaghetti, macaroni,
noodles)
1/2 cup, cooked
1 oz, dry
Popcorn
3 cups, popped
Quinoa
1/2 cup, cooked
Ready-to-eat breakfast cereal
1 cup, flakes or rounds
1-1/4 cup, puffed
Rice
1/2 cup, cooked
1 oz, dry
Tortillas
1 small flour tortilla (6" diameter)
1 corn tortilla (6" diameter)
U.S. Department of Agriculture
TABLE 10.5 MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Proteins
Table
Protein
Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
610

Protein
Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
Meats
1 oz cooked lean beef, goat, ham, lamb, or pork
1 oz cooked lean ground beef or pork
1 slice of luncheon or deli meats (beef, chicken, ham, pork, turkey)
1 oz cooked game meats (bear, bison, deer, elk, moose, opossum, rabbit,
venison)
1 oz cooked organ meats
Poultry
1 oz cooked (without skin) chicken, ostrich, or turkey
2 oz cooked Cornish hen, duck, goose, pheasant, or quail
1 sandwich slice of turkey or chicken breast (4-1/2" × 2-1/2" × 1/8")
Seafood
1 oz cooked finfish (black sea bass, catfish, cod, flounder, freshwater
trout, haddock, hake, halibut, herring, light tuna, mackerel, mullet, perch,
pollock, salmon, sea bass, snapper, sole, tilapia, whiting)
1 oz cooked shellfish (clams, crab, crayfish, lobster, mussels, octopus,
oysters, scallops, shrimp, squid [calamari])
1 oz canned fish (anchovies, freshwater trout, herring, light tuna, salmon,
sardines)
Eggs
1 egg
1-1/2 egg whites (or 3 tbsp liquid egg white product)
Nuts, seeds,
and soy
products
1/2 oz of nuts (12 almonds, 24 pistachios, 7 walnut halves)
1/2 oz of seeds (chia, flax, pumpkin, sesame, sunflower, or squash
seeds), hulled, roasted
1 tbsp of almond, cashew, peanut, or sunflower butter, or sesame paste
(tahini)
1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tofu
1 oz tempeh, cooked
Beans, peas,
and lentils
1/4 cup of cooked beans, peas, or lentils (bayo, black, brown, fava,
garbanzo, kidney, lima, mung, navy, pigeon, pink, pinto, soy, or white
beans; black-eyed peas [cow peas] or split peas; and red, brown, and
green lentils)
1/4 cup of baked beans or refried beans
1 falafel patty (2-1/4", 4 oz)
6 tbsp hummus
U.S. Department of Agriculture
TABLE 10.6 MyPlate Cup of Dairy Table
Dairy
Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
611

Dairy
Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
Milk
1 cup milk
1 half-pint container milk
1/2 cup evaporated milk
1 cup calcium-fortified soy milk
1 half-pint container calcium-fortified soy milk
Yogurt
1 cup yogurt (dairy or fortified soy)
Cheese
1-1/2 oz hard cheese (cheddar, mozzarella, Swiss, Parmesan)
1/3 cup shredded cheese
1 oz processed cheese (American)
1/2 cup ricotta cheese
2 cups cottage cheese
2 oz queso fresco
2 slices queso blanco
U.S. Department of Agriculture
612
