CHAPTER 11
NUTRITION STRATEGIES FOR
MAXIMIZING PERFORMANCE
Shawn M. Arent, PhD, and Abbie E. Smith-Ryan, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contribution of Marie Spano to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
list pre-, during-, and postcompetition nutrition recommendations for
different sports;
understand nutrition guidelines for aerobic exercise performance and
recovery;
understand nutrition recommendations for strength and hypertrophy;
provide guidelines for weight gain and weight loss;
identify hydration recommendations;
recognize signs and symptoms of relative energy deficiency syndrome
(RED-S) and eating disorders;
understand the importance of having an intervention and referral system in
place for athletes suspected of having an eating disorder;
recognize the prevalence and etiologies of obesity; and
assist in the assessment process for obese individuals.
What athletes eat and drink before and during competition can affect their
performance, while their postevent meal has a greater impact on their recovery
and, if the time period between events is less than 24 hours, performance in the
next event or game. Therefore, this chapter focuses on pre-, during-, and
postcompetition nutrition while also providing guidelines for athletes who want to
lose or gain weight. Additionally, no talk about weight is complete unless it
includes information on disordered eating and eating disorders. It is imperative
that the strength and conditioning professional recognize when an athlete may
613

have signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and be an active member of the
treatment team.
614

Precompetition, During-Event, and
Postcompetition Nutrition
Athletes’ dietary practices over time will influence their overall health and
performance. Additionally, what athletes eat before and during competition can
have both physiological and psychological effects on performance, while their
postcompetition meal affects recovery and may therefore influence how they
perform during their next bout of training or competition.
Precompetition Nutrition
The precompetition meal helps provide fluid to maintain adequate hydration,
carbohydrate to maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen levels, and protein
to reduce muscle soreness (7, 31). Glycogen is the main form of energy used
during high-intensity (>70% V̇O2max) exercise; once these stores become
depleted, the athlete will experience muscular fatigue (60). Small quantities of
glycogen are stored in liver and muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of
glycogen per kilogram body weight (3). For example, an 80 kilogram (176 lb)
man can store approximately 1,200 grams of glycogen. Glycogen stored in the
liver is used for the whole body, while glycogen stored in muscle tissue is used
by muscle (60).
Despite the vital roles that both hydration and glycogen play in athletic
performance, studies examining the importance of the precompetition meal and
its effect on performance are equivocal due to differences in study subjects and
methods used. Some show that a high-carbohydrate preexercise meal enhances
aerobic time to exhaustion (29, 98) as well as anaerobic performance in
adolescent males (75), while no effect on time trial performance has been
reported in the literature (105). Despite these differences and the fact that
studies simulating performance cannot take into account several factors that
distinguish the competitive environment from a lab setting, such as
precompetition nerves, temperature, humidity, and altitude, athletes can adapt
general precompetition guidelines based on the literature to fit their own unique
needs and the competitive environment they are in. Importantly, an
individualized precompetition meal should be consumed.
All precompetition meals should take timing, meal and fluid composition,
event or sport, and individual athlete preferences into account. In order to
minimize the potential for stomach upset, smaller quantities of fluids and food
should be consumed when the precompetition meal is consumed closer in
temporal proximity to competition. Precompetition foods and beverages should
be familiar to the athlete (i.e., tried in practice), low in fat and fiber so that they
615

empty rapidly from the stomach and minimize any potential for gastrointestinal
distress, and moderate in protein (protein promotes longer-lasting satiety and
accelerates recovery) (7).
Athletes can choose from either high or low glycemic index (131) (see chapter
10 for more details) carbohydrates before competition based on individual
preference or tolerance and fiber content; research does not indicate that one is
more advantageous than the other (15). Even though consuming carbohydrates
that rapidly increase insulin, such as glucose, will lead to an initial drop in blood
sugar at the beginning of exercise, blood sugar levels typically return to normal
within approximately 20 minutes, and the initial drop has no negative effect on
performance (82).
Minimizing Gastrointestinal Issues
To minimize the likelihood of stomach discomfort during competition, athletes should do the
following:
Try food in practice first. Always try new foods during several practice sessions before
competition (7).
When the meal is closer in time to the start of the game or event, consume smaller amounts
of food and liquids.
Avoid high-fat and high-fiber foods. Both fat and fiber slow down the rate of digestion. When
food is still being digested as an athlete exercises, he or she may experience stomach cramps
(7).
Avoid sugar alcohols. Despite their name, sugar alcohols contain no alcohol, but their
chemical structure resembles that of both sugar and alcohol. Sugar alcohols are a type of
carbohydrate that is not completely absorbed in the gut. Consequently, consumption can
cause gas, bloating, and cramping and may have a laxative effect. Sugar alcohols are found in
some low-carbohydrate and sugar-free products, including sugar-free gum, toothpaste, and
energy drinks. The two sugar alcohols most likely to cause gastrointestinal issues are sorbitol
and mannitol (4). Any product that could result in consumption of 20 grams of mannitol must
carry this warning on the label: “Excess consumption may have a laxative effect.” Individual
responses to sugar alcohol vary. Sugar alcohols include xylitol (the most common one found
in dental products), erythritol, sorbitol, mannitol, maltitol, isomalt, lactitol, hydrogenated
starch hydrolysates, and hydrogenated glucose syrups (4).
Aerobic Endurance Sports
The precompetition meal may be most important for aerobic endurance athletes
who compete in long-duration activity (>2 h) in the morning after an overnight
fast. Upon waking in the morning, blood sugar levels are low and liver glycogen
stores are substantially reduced. Both conditions decrease the amount of
carbohydrate available for use as energy. Carbohydrates at the precompetition
meal can significantly enhance glycogen stores and improve exercise time to
616

exhaustion in those who regularly include carbohydrate in their diets, when
consumed 3 or more hours before competition (33, 146).
A crossover study examined whether a precompetition high-carbohydrate
meal combined with a carbohydrate-electrolyte sports drink consumed during
exercise improved aerobic endurance running capacity (70% V̇O2max until
exhaustion) more than the sports drink alone (28). The scientists had men
perform three treadmill runs, each separated by one week, after an overnight
fast followed by a carbohydrate meal 3 hours before exercise in addition to a
carbohydrate-electrolyte sports drink during running; a carbohydrate meal 3
hours before exercise and water during running; or a low-calorie placebo drink
(same flavor as the sport drink) 3 hours before exercise and water during
running. They replicated the same diet for the two-day period before each trial.
No differences were noted in average daily caloric intake between the three
trials. Consumption of the high-carbohydrate preexercise meal improved aerobic
endurance running capacity by 9% compared to the placebo drink before
exercise and water during the run. However, the high-carbohydrate meal plus
sport drink during the run improved aerobic endurance capacity by 22%
compared to the placebo beforehand and sport drink during the run. These
results indicate that a high-carbohydrate preexercise or precompetition meal can
help improve aerobic endurance running capacity (28).
Aerobic endurance athletes who are not chronically adapted to a low-
carbohydrate diet and start exercise with depleted glycogen stores will break
down muscle to use amino acids for energy and may acutely suppress immune
and central nervous system functioning. Therefore, a high-carbohydrate
preexercise meal can help attenuate the breakdown of skeletal muscle while also
providing carbohydrate for immune and nervous system functioning (23, 76).
Over time, adaptation to chronic consumption of a low-carbohydrate diet
increases the body’s reliance on its vast storage of fat as a fuel source during
exercise, though training with low glycogen stores may suppress immune and
central nervous system functioning (23, 53). In a study examining protein
catabolism, six subjects rode a cycle ergometer for 1 hour at 61% V̇O2max after
a carbohydrate loading protocol or carbohydrate depletion. In the
carbohydrate-depleted state, protein breakdown was calculated at 13.7 grams
per hour, which represented 10.7% of the calories used during exercise (76).
It is clear that a preexercise meal consumed hours before competition can
help improve aerobic endurance performance. However, extremely early morning
start times can complicate the desire to feed with a concurrent desire for
maximum sleep. For instance, a runner who must be at the starting line of a race
at 7:00 a.m. may find that waking up at 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. to eat is not practical.
Athletes who find themselves in this scenario should practice eating small
617

amounts of food 1 to 2 hours before they start, transitioning to easily digestible
carbohydrates and liquid carbohydrates before competition, while also ensuring
that they consume an adequate amount of carbohydrate during competition.
The following are general recommendations that can be adapted to meet each
athlete’s individual needs. More research needs to be done to examine the needs
of athletes in a variety of sports and to determine the effects of varying amounts
of each macronutrient on performance (100). Until this is done, the guidelines
for aerobic endurance athletes are adapted to other sports. This information
should also be applied to strength, power, and team or field sport athletes.
Preexercise feeding may be more important than postexercise feeding if an
athlete is underfueled. Female athletes may see greater benefits from their
training when nutrients are consumed before exercise compared to after
exercise on strength and lean mass adaptations (111).
Athletes should prehydrate, if necessary, several hours before exercise to
allow for fluid absorption and urine output. Their urine specific gravity
(USG) reading should be <1.02 (120).
Athletes who tend to get nauseated easily, who have experienced diarrhea
during competition, who get anxious or experience precompetition jitters,
or who compete in high-intensity sports (jarring movements can increase
the likelihood of stomach upset), as well as those who are competing in
the heat, may want to consider eating at least 4 hours before competition,
as well as trying a variety of types of low-fiber carbohydrate options.
Aerobic endurance athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competition
should include approximately 1 to 4 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
(131).
If the precompetition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carbohydrate per kilogram body
weight. Athletes should follow an individualized hydration plan. During
prolonged activity in hot weather, they should consume a sport drink
containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the
anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (120).
When consumed closer to the start of competition, the preexercise meal
should be smaller. Additionally, liquid sources of carbohydrate may be
preferable when the preexercise meal is 1 hour before the event because
they are emptied from the stomach faster than solid food (7). Gels,
gummies, and similar sources of carbohydrate are also digested very
quickly. Table 11.1 summarizes these recommendations while providing
sample food options.
618

TABLE 11.1 Precompetition Food and Fluid Recommendations
for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Time before
competition
Food
recommendations
Fluid
recommendations
Sample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athlete
Sample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
1 h
0.5 g carbohydrate
per kilogram body
weight
34 g
carbohydrate
1 small
banana
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink
37 g
carbohydrate
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
2 h
1 g carbohydrate
per kilogram body
weight
If not adequately
hydrated, sip on 3-5
mL (0.10-0.17 fl oz)
of fluid per kilogram
body weight (120)
68 g
carbohydrate
7-12 fl oz (207-
355 mL) fluid
2.5 cups
(525 g)
boiled,
plain
potato,
flesh only
2 mini
bagels
with 1
tbsp (20
g) jam
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink
66 g
carbohydrate
72 g
carbohydrate
8 g protein
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
4 h or more
1-4 g carbohydrate
per kilogram body
weight
0.15-0.25 g protein
per kilogram body
weight (105)
Should consume
approximately 5-7
mL (0.17-0.24 fl oz)
of water or a sport
drink per kilogram
body weight (120)
68-273 g
carbohydrate
10-17 g protein
Minimal fat
Bowl of
cereal
and fruit
(8 fl oz
[237 mL]
skim
milk, 2
cups [55
g]
Cheerios,
1/4 cup
[40 g]
unpacked
raisins)
74 g
carbohydrate
11 g protein
14 fl oz (414
mL) water
Egg
white
sandwich
(2 egg
whites, 2
pieces of
72 g
carbohydrate
(based on 1
slice = 64 g
weight)
17 g protein
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes.
619

Time before
competition
Food
recommendations
Fluid
recommendations
Sample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athlete
Sample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
white
bread)
(skip
high-
fiber
breads
before
workout)
14 fl oz (414
mL) water
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes.
Athletes may want to keep a record of their food intake, including the time
each meal or snack was consumed and how they felt while training. By recording
the types and amounts of food consumed and when these are consumed in
relation to training, athletes may be able to identify any issues they are having
with performance or stomach upset and develop a better precompetition plan.
Carbohydrate foods that are high in fructose, sorbitol, and fermentable
oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols (FODMAPs) may
increase the risk of gastrointestinal distress when consumed before exercise.
Selecting foods that are lower FODMAP and lower fructose may minimize the
likelihood of gastrointestinal issues.
The primary purpose of the precompetition meal is to provide
sufficient fluid to maintain hydration and carbohydrate to
maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen while also satisfying
hunger.
Carbohydrate Loading
Depletion of muscle and liver glycogen leads to fatigue during long-term aerobic
endurance exercise (117, 129, 141). Therefore, a technique called carbohydrate
loading has been used for decades to enhance muscle glycogen before aerobic
endurance events. Although there are many different variations of carbohydrate
loading, all include high carbohydrate intake in the days leading up to an event
to maximize glycogen stores and therefore carbohydrate availability in the later
stages of the event (32). Carbohydrate loading offers potential benefits for
athletes training and competing for more than 90 minutes, such as distance
runners, road cyclists, cross-country skiers, and other aerobic endurance athletes
who risk depleting glycogen stores, and it may conceivably benefit other athletes
as well (112).
620

A commonly used carbohydrate loading regimen includes three days of a high-
carbohydrate diet in concert with tapering exercise the week before competition
and complete rest the day before the event. The diet should provide adequate
calories and carbohydrate per day: 8 to 10 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight. This regimen should increase muscle glycogen stores 20% to 40%
above normal (32). However, higher intakes, 10 to 12 grams of carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight, have been suggested for runners during the 36 to 48
hours before a marathon (22).
Studies show that carbohydrate loading is effective in men (129). However,
the studies in women have been mixed. One study examined the effects of
carbohydrate loading on aerobic endurance performance and substrate use in
eight 20- to 40-year-old weight-stable, eumenorrheic female runners with an
average running history of 53 kilometers (33 miles) per week for at least 12
months before the study and a typical carbohydrate intake below 65% of total
caloric intake (9). Each female completed three different 24.2-kilometer (15-
mile) self-paced treadmill performance runs after four days on each experimental
diet 
regimen: 
carbohydrate 
supplementation 
(50% 
of 
calories 
from
carbohydrate), carbohydrate loading and supplementation (75% of calories from
carbohydrate), and placebo (50% of calories from carbohydrate). Both the
carbohydrate-supplemented and carbohydrate loading plus supplementation
groups consumed a 6% carbohydrate-electrolyte solution before exercise (6
mL/kg of body weight) and every 20 minutes during exercise (3 mL/kg of body
weight). And though the carbohydrate-supplemented and carbohydrate loading
plus supplementation groups used a greater portion of energy from carbohydrate
during their runs, there was no significant difference in running performance
between the groups. However, both total calories and grams of carbohydrate per
day were not reported; therefore, it is possible that total calorie or carbohydrate
intakes (or both) were not adequate for the runners. Additionally, given the small
number of subjects included in this study, differences in performance may have
been noted if more subjects had been included (9).
In another study, researchers found that males increased glycogen content
significantly while female athletes did not after increasing carbohydrate intake
from 58% to 74% of calories for four days before a submaximal aerobic
endurance exercise test, due to either inadequate carbohydrate or calorie intake
(or both) or sex differences in glycogen storage (129). In a follow-up study, the
same researchers examined glycogen storage capacity in six well-trained men
and six well-trained women (132). Subjects were randomly assigned to one of
three diets for four days: a high-carbohydrate diet (75% of total calorie intake),
a high-carbohydrate diet plus extra calories (75% of calories from carbohydrate
and a 34% increase in total calories), or their habitual daily diet. In men, both
621

the higher-carbohydrate diet and higher-carbohydrate plus extra calories diet led
to significantly greater levels of glycogen than the habitual diet. However, in
women, only the higher-carbohydrate plus extra calories diet resulted in
significant increases in glycogen storage compared to the habitual diet. In the
high-carbohydrate conditions, men increased their total carbohydrate intake to
7.9 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight, whereas women reached
just 6.4 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight. No differences were
noted between men and women in their ability to use glycogen as measured by
enzymatic activity. Therefore, the failure of previous studies to show improved
performance from carbohydrate loading in women was likely due to inadequate
overall carbohydrate intake (132). This theory (that women were not consuming
enough total carbohydrate in many of the protocols) was backed up in a study
examining female cyclists. In trained female cyclists, three or four days on a
moderate-carbohydrate diet (48% of calories from carbohydrates) followed by
three or four days consuming 78% of calories from carbohydrates (8.14 g of
carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) led to significant increases in glycogen
stores and greater cycling time to exhaustion compared to seven days on the
moderate-carbohydrate diet (142). Researchers have found that glycogen
storage capacity in the 4-hour time period after exercise did not differ between
men and women when they consumed the same amount of carbohydrate per
unit body weight (1 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight immediately and
1 hour after the completion of exercise) (130). And while glycogen storage
capacity is greater during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle in women as
compared to the early follicular phase due to hormonal differences, carbohydrate
loading and increased carbohydrate intake can make up for this difference (99).
The main challenge with carbohydrate loading in females appears to be their
overall daily calorie intake. Women who habitually consume less than 2,400
calories per day may find it difficult to consume greater amounts of
carbohydrate. Therefore, female athletes may need to increase their total energy
intake above 2,400 calories, in addition to consuming a higher-carbohydrate diet,
in order to increase glycogen stores (129, 142).
Though the majority of studies on carbohydrate loading have been done in
aerobic endurance athletes, some research has attempted to examine
carbohydrate loading for athletes in high-intensity sports as well. In a
randomized, crossover design, seven professional soccer players who consumed
an average of 46% of calories from carbohydrates ate either a 39% or a 65%
carbohydrate diet two days before being testing. Each test consisted of 6,858
meters (7,500 yd) of field work (completed at 65%, 57%, and 81% V̇O2max)
followed by a treadmill run to exhaustion in an attempt to mimic a soccer game.
After the high-carbohydrate diet, the players ran 17.1 kilometers (10.6 miles)
622

total, which was 0.9 kilometers (0.6 miles) longer (a significant difference) than
the distance run while on the lower-carbohydrate diet. However, three of the
athletes ran less than 420 meters (459 yd) longer, indicating significant variability
in the athletes’ responses to a higher-carbohydrate regimen (14). The results of
this study may or may not be applicable to soccer players, since the average
distance covered in a soccer match is considerably shorter (10.3 km [6.4 miles]
with a range of 9.7 to 11.3 km [6.0-7.0 miles], as reported in one study), and it
is covered in an intermittent manner and at varying levels of intensity (72).
In a study examining the effect of carbohydrate loading on resistance exercise
performance, eight healthy young men were randomly assigned to either a
higher-carbohydrate (6.5 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) or a
moderate-carbohydrate diet (4.4 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) for
four days. After this period, they participated in a resistance exercise test
including 4 sets of 12 repetitions of maximal-effort jump squats with a load of
30% of a 1-repetition maximum (1RM) and a 2-minute rest period between sets
(52). There was no significant difference in power performance between subjects
on the high-carbohydrate and the moderate-carbohydrate diets. Therefore, in
this study a higher-carbohydrate diet did not enhance power performance during
a 4-set resistance exercise test. However, it is unclear whether the carbohydrate
loading regimen could have affected power performance if more sets were
performed or if the carbohydrate loading regimen more closely resembled that of
an aerobic endurance athlete, providing 8 to 10 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight (52).
The degree of benefit derived from carbohydrate loading varies between
individuals, even between aerobic endurance athletes, and therefore athletes
should determine the value of this regimen while weighing any negative side
effects, such as temporary weight gain, in practice before competition. Athletes
who use carbohydrate loading as a means to maximize glycogen storage should
also know how different types of carbohydrates affect them. For instance,
oligosaccharides, which are found in dry beans and peas, onions, and foods with
added inulin or other oligosaccharides (such as some nutrition bars and shakes),
are rapidly fermented by bacteria in the gut, which can lead to excessive
intestinal gas and bloating. Dietary fiber is found in vegetables, fruits, whole
grains, dry beans and peas, nuts, and seeds (140). Table 11.2 provides a sample
daily meal plan for a 68-kilogram (150-pound) athlete following research-based
carbohydrate recommendations for aerobic endurance athletes.
Carbohydrate loading is an effective strategy to maximize glycogen
storage. However, athletes must consume 8 to 10 grams of
623

carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during the loading
period to notice any benefit from carbohydrate loading.
During-Event Nutrition
Nutrition is an important factor during aerobic endurance events lasting greater
than 45 minutes, intermittent-activity sports, or when an athlete has multiple
events in one day. Fluids and carbohydrates can directly affect performance.
Amino acid oxidation, primarily the branched chain amino acids, are oxidized
during 
sustained 
aerobic 
endurance 
exercise, 
providing 
substrate 
for
gluconeogenesis. Easily digestible proteins can minimize muscle damage and
substrate depletion (116).
Proper hydration during competition is essential for performance while also
helping to prevent overheating, dehydration, and heat illness. Athletes should
hydrate several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and urine
output before competing. Additionally, they should consume enough fluid during
exercise to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body weight (120). The
optimal sport drink contains 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride
as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (2). Sport drinks with a higher
concentration of carbohydrate—those that contain more than 8%—delay gastric
emptying (how quickly the drink is emptied from the stomach), which could lead
to stomach discomfort (87). Therefore, a carbohydrate concentration of 6% to
8% may be ideal (120).
TABLE 11.2 Carbohydrate Loading Regimens and Sample
Daily Meal Plans for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Amount of carbohydrate
Sample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete
Nutrition breakdown
8-10 g carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on day 3 before an event (30)
Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 large whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato, 1/2 green bell
pepper)
4 slices (240 g) multigrain toast
1 cup (150 g) mixed berries
5.3 oz (150 g) plain Greek yogurt
Snack:
6 tbsp (90 g) hummus
1 whole wheat pita bread (60 g)
Lunch:
~8.1 g carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e.,
550 g total carbohydrate)
100 g fat
175 g protein
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
624

Amount of carbohydrate
Sample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete
Nutrition breakdown
Chicken stir fry (2 cups [320 g] brown
rice, 6 oz [170 g] cooked chicken breast,
1 cup [150 g] mixed stir fry vegetables
cooked in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oil)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) with 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 cup (150 g) granola
5.3 oz (150 g) Greek yogurt
Dinner:
Indian chicken tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chicken breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed broccoli)
10-12 g carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on each of the two days before
an event (22)
Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 large whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato, 1/2 green bell
pepper)
Swedish overnight oats (2.5 oz [70 g]
rolled oats, 5.3 oz [150 g] Greek yogurt,
5.3 oz [150 g] mixed berries, 1 tbsp [21
g] honey)
Snack:
8 tbsp (113 g) hummus
2 whole wheat pita bread (120 g)
Lunch:
Chicken stir fry (2 cups [320 g] brown
rice, 4 oz [113 g] cooked chicken breast,
1 cup [150 g] mixed stir fry vegetables,
all cooked in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oil)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) with 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 packet (43 g) instant oatmeal
1/3 cup (50 g) packed raisins added
8 fl oz (237 mL) skim milk
Dinner:
Indian chicken tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chicken breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]
~10.3 g carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e.,
700 g total carbohydrate)
105 g fat
210 g protein
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
625

Amount of carbohydrate
Sample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete
Nutrition breakdown
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed broccoli
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
Fluid intake guidelines are different for children. According to the American
Academy of Pediatrics, children weighing 40 kg (88 pounds) should drink 5 fluid
ounces (148 mL) of cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes
during practice, while adolescents weighing 60 kg (132 pounds) should drink 9
fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes even if they do not feel thirsty. They
also recommend a sodium chloride concentration of 15 to 20 mmol/L
(approximately 1 g per liter), which has been shown to increase voluntary
hydration by 90% when compared to unflavored water (30, 106, 147). Despite
these recommendations, keep in mind that 9 ounces of fluid at one time is a
considerable amount for an adolescent and may cause stomach distress.
Therefore, these guidelines may need to be adjusted for individual athletes,
depending on size and sweat rates.
Aerobic Endurance Sports
Consuming carbohydrates during prolonged aerobic endurance exercise can
improve performance while also reducing exercise-induced stress and
suppression of immune system functioning (95). And though sport drinks provide
carbohydrates, they cannot keep up with an athlete’s carbohydrate use during
prolonged, intense activity (unless an excessive amount of fluid is consumed). In
fact, athletes who train intensely may burn 600 to 1,200 calories or more per
hour (70). Several studies show that a carbohydrate intake ranging from 28 to
144 grams per hour (with higher amounts studied during cycling) during an
aerobic endurance activity can decrease reliance on limited glycogen stores,
extend time to exhaustion, and improve performance by providing a steady
stream of carbohydrate that can be used for energy (32, 66, 137).
Despite greater intakes per hour, as noted earlier, exogenous (external; that
which is consumed) carbohydrate oxidation rates do not exceed 1.0 to 1.1 gram
per minute, likely due to the rate of glucose absorption and possibly also the
limited delivery rate of 1 gram per minute of glucose into the bloodstream (65).
However, each carbohydrate has a different rate of oxidation. Glucose, sucrose,
maltose, maltodextrins, and amylopectin are oxidized quickly; the oxidation rates
of fructose, galactose, and amylose are 25% to 50% slower (65). Additionally,
each type of carbohydrate has a different intestinal transport system. If an
athlete 
consumes 
one 
type 
of 
carbohydrate—fructose, 
for 
instance—
626

carbohydrate digestion will be limited when the intestinal transporter for fructose
becomes saturated. Therefore, consuming multiple types of carbohydrates
together, such as sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin, increases the
rate of carbohydrate absorption and exogenous carbohydrate oxidation
compared to consuming an isocaloric amount of just one type of sugar (62). In
addition to improving the rate of carbohydrate use by the body, consuming
multiple types of carbohydrate during exercise was found to improve cycling
time-trial performance after 120 minutes of cycling (the study design simulated
the last few stages of an aerobic endurance race when an athlete must provide
maximum effort) when subjects were provided glucose combined with fructose
versus glucose only at a rate of 1.8 grams per minute (108 g of carbohydrate per
hour) (34). Additionally, athletes given 36 grams of glucose and fructose every
15 minutes had a better 100 kilometer (62 miles) cycling time than cyclists given
only glucose every 15 minutes (137).
In addition to actually ingesting carbohydrates, simply rinsing carbohydrates
through the mouth (without actually ingesting them) seems to improve
performance lasting approximately 1 hour by 2% to 3%, presumably by affecting
the central nervous system (64).
In addition to providing carbohydrates during an aerobic endurance activity,
adding protein to a carbohydrate gel led to increased time until exhaustion
during a bout of cycling while also attenuating the rise in creatine kinase (a
marker of muscle damage) during cycling, due either to the protein itself or to
the additional calories provided by the protein (119). A meta-analysis and review
of the research examining how the addition of protein to carbohydrate affects
aerobic endurance performance revealed mixed findings (119). Only time-to-
exhaustion studies showed that the addition of protein made a significant
difference. However, these studies were not controlled for calorie intake during
the trial; therefore, it is unclear if any benefit was due to protein or to the added
calories provided by the protein. The three time-trial studies showed no
difference between carbohydrate only and carbohydrate plus protein (127).
Fructose and Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Fructose, a sugar found naturally in fruit and also added to a number of foods and beverages,
including many sports nutrition products, is often blamed for symptoms of stomach upset during
exercise. Though some people do not completely absorb fructose and may therefore experience
bloating, gas, abdominal discomfort, and alterations in bowel functioning after consuming this
sugar (123), studies have not examined gastrointestinal symptoms related to fructose ingestion
alone in athletes. Thus, athletes need to test, in practice, whether changing their sport drinks or
other products they consume during training (and testing fructose-free conditions) helps alleviate
any gastrointestinal symptoms they may be having (126). Athletes with irritable bowel syndrome
are more likely to have a problem absorbing fructose and therefore experience side effects (123).
627

Intermittent High-Intensity Sports
Many team sports, such as soccer, tennis, basketball, and American football,
include repeated bouts of short-duration, high-intensity activity in addition to
involving a wide range of skills. Fatigue during play could stem from a number of
factors, including decreased or depleted glycogen stores and dehydration. The
provision of both fluids and carbohydrate is essential for performance during
prolonged intermittent sports. For instance, a long tennis match may last 4 hours
—considerably longer than many aerobic endurance events. Because tennis
players cannot drink continuously during a match and can lose more than 2.5
liters (84.5 fl oz) of fluid per hour, a recommendation of 200 to 400 milliliters
(6.7-13.5 fl oz) per changeover (switching sides) has been put forth for these
athletes (69). In addition to maintaining hydration status, research shows that
carbohydrate supplementation may not affect ratings of perceived exertion (46)
but improves stroke quality (which includes measures of velocity, precision, and
error rate) during prolonged play (141).
In soccer players, 5 milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight of a 6.9%
glucose-polymer drink, consumed 15 minutes before each match and at halftime,
made no difference in several measures of performance such as successful
tackles, heading, dribbling, or shooting ability (150). Yet another soccer study,
this one with professional soccer players, found that the group consuming a
carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage improved some parameters of performance
during match play. In this study, 22 professional male soccer players consumed
the same diet for seven days (55% of the calories were derived from
carbohydrate, 25% from fat, and 20% from protein), refrained from exercise for
three days before the match, and consumed a standardized breakfast 4 hours
before the match on game day. They were divided into two groups, receiving
either a carbohydrate-electrolyte drink (7% carbohydrates, sodium 24 mmol/L,
chloride 12 mmol/L, potassium 3 mmol/L) or placebo. Each group drank 5
milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight before the match and 2 milliliters
(0.1 fl oz) per kilogram body weight every 15 minutes during the 90-minute
game. The group receiving the carbohydrate-electrolyte drink finished the
specific dribble test faster than those receiving the placebo. In addition, ratings
of precision were higher in the carbohydrate-electrolyte trial versus placebo.
However, there were no differences in the coordination or power tests between
groups. In this particular study, supplementation with a carbohydrate-electrolyte
drink improved soccer-specific skill performance compared with a placebo (101).
In another study that found that during-play carbohydrate consumption was
beneficial, a randomized, double-blind protocol was used. Seventeen male soccer
players received 8 milliliters (0.3 fl oz) of a 6.4% carbohydrate-electrolyte
beverage per kilogram body weight before exercise plus 3 milliliters (0.1 fl oz)
628

per kilogram body weight after every 15 minutes (for a total of 52 g of
carbohydrate per hour) during a 90-minute intermittent shuttle test (6).
Consuming the carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage attenuated a significant
decrease in skill reduction from before exercise until the last 15 to 30 minutes of
exercise compared to placebo. In the carbohydrate trial, there was a 3%
reduction in skill performance during this time period, while in the placebo trial a
15% decline in skill performance was noted. However, this trial was performed
after carbohydrate-depleting exercise followed by a low-carbohydrate meal and
then an overnight fast; therefore, the effect of carbohydrates on performance
may depend not only on the amount consumed during intermittent activities but
also on whether the athlete is competing in a fed or fasted and glycogen-
depleted state (6).
In another study, which used four 15-minute quarters of intermittent high-
intensity shuttles at various intensities (walking, jogging, running, sprinting, and
jumping), separated by a 20-minute rest at halftime and followed by a shuttle
run to fatigue (designed to mimic a competitive soccer or basketball game),
subjects who consumed a carbohydrate-electrolyte (carbohydrate) drink
before exercise (5 mL of a 6% solution per kilogram body weight) and at
halftime (5 mL of a 18% solution per kilogram body weight) ran 37% longer in
the run to fatigue than those receiving a placebo and were significantly faster in
a 20 meter (22 yd) sprint during the fourth quarter. In addition, the
carbohydrate-supplemented group performed better on a total body motor skill
test during the later stages of exercise and reported decreased perceptions of
fatigue, indicating that the consumption of a carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage
during intermittent sports is advantageous (145).
Strength and Power Sports
Carbohydrates are also an essential source of energy used during resistance
training and therefore in strength and power sports. Research studies using a
series of different weightlifting protocols found that participants used a
significant amount of muscle glycogen (78), though this is notably lower than
what is typically seen for power–endurance or intermittent high-intensity sports.
Most of these studies had participants perform just a few sets of exercises.
Therefore, athletes who perform in strength and power competitions or sports,
or in positions that rely on muscle strength and power (e.g., hammer throwers
and offensive linemen in American football), could deplete their muscle glycogen
stores to a level that affects performance. Furthermore, starting with already low
carbohydrate stores will increase muscle breakdown (76). Strength and power
athletes can maintain their glycogen stores, which may decrease muscular
629

fatigue in slow-twitch fibers and possibly lead to better performance, by
supplementing with carbohydrate before and during competition (47).
During-Competition Food and Fluid
Recommendations
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electrolyte concentrations, athletes should measure
weight changes during training and competition in specific weather conditions and develop
individualized hydration strategies based on this information (120). During prolonged activity in hot
weather, the Institute of Medicine recommends sport drinks containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium
(460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter,
and carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (2).
Hydration guidance for children and adolescents consists of 5 to 9 fluid ounces (148-266 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage or sport drink depending on their weight. For example,
children or adolescents weighing 40 kilograms (88 lb) should drink 5 fluid ounces (148 mL) and
those weighing 60 kg (132 lb) should drink 9 fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes during
practice, even if they do not feel thirsty (30, 37, 106). Aerobic endurance athletes should consume
28 to 144 grams of multiple types of carbohydrates together, such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, or
maltodextrin, each hour during prolonged aerobic endurance activity (32, 34, 66, 137).
Postcompetition Nutrition
The postcompetition meal helps athletes rehydrate, replenish glycogen stores,
and repair muscle tissue. Therefore, what they consume in the time period soon
after training or competition helps optimize adaptations as well as prepare their
body for the next bout of activity. This time frame has been referred to as a
garage door of opportunity because the athlete’s body is primed to assimilate
nutrients and also because this previously assumed anabolic window is
actually much longer than was originally thought (11). Each athlete’s
postcompetition needs vary based on the sport he or she plays, intensity during
play, amount of time played, the individual’s weight and age, and probably the
person’s sex. However, much more research has been conducted with male
subjects as opposed to females; therefore, recommendations are not broken out
based on sex due to a lack of sufficient data in females.
After competition, athletes should replace fluid and electrolyte losses. If time
permits, normal meals, snacks (provided they contain some sodium), and water
will restore fluid and electrolyte losses. More salt can be added to foods when
sweat sodium losses are substantial (1, 120). Athletes can choose a
carbohydrate-electrolyte sport drink or plain water alongside foods that contain
sodium chloride (or they can salt their foods) since sodium is essential for
helping the body retain fluid (83, 120, 125). Rehydration strategies should be
individualized as much as possible. Athletes competing in weight-class sports
such as wrestling and mixed martial arts may deliberately dehydrate themselves
630

to make weight and attempt to rehydrate before competition, though short time
periods between weighing and competing may mean starting competition in a
dehydrated state, leading to poor performance and health risks.
Aerobic Endurance Events
After prolonged aerobic endurance events, it is important to replenish
carbohydrate stores before the next training session or competition (whichever
comes first) and to aid in immune system function and consume enough protein
to build and repair muscle. Glycogen synthesis occurs in two distinct phases. The
first phase is independent of insulin and lasts 30 to 60 minutes, and glycogen
synthesis occurs rapidly. The second phase lasts several hours, and glycogen
synthesis occurs at a much slower pace. Glycogen synthesis occurs at a rapid
rate when large amounts of carbohydrate, 1.0 to 1.85 grams per kilogram body
weight per hour, are consumed immediately after exercise or competition and at
regular intervals every 15 to 60 minutes thereafter for up to 5 hours (61). For
some athletes, though, it may be difficult to ingest carbohydrate quantities at the
upper end of that range. Though athletes may be able to fully replenish their
glycogen stores right away or over the course of a 24-hour period after a long
training session, this is not necessarily the case after competition. Strenuous
aerobic endurance events that result in measurable muscle damage, such as the
marathon, lead to delayed glycogen resynthesis even if an athlete consumes a
higher-carbohydrate diet, possibly due to either metabolic disturbance or
mechanical damage to muscle cells (12, 124).
Though athletes are often told that they need to eat carbohydrate
immediately after they finish competing, research shows that this is not always
necessary; they may be able to wait 2 hours after finishing a glycogen-depleting
event before eating carbohydrate, although this may not necessarily be optimal.
In a study examining the rate of glycogen resynthesis, five high-glycemic meals
were given to athletes over the course of a 24-hour period after a 2-hour-long
glycogen-depleting bout of cycling. One group received the first three meals over
the 4-hour period after exercise, while the second group received the first three
meals at regular 2-hour intervals starting 2 hours after they finished over the
first 6 hours after exercise. The rate of glycogen resynthesis was the same
between groups after 8 hours and after 24 hours (103). Therefore, athletes who
have more than 24 hours to recover can likely wait before eating after exercise
and replace their glycogen over the 24-hour time period after exercise as long as
they consume an adequate amount of carbohydrate, though they may not
receive the same systemic recovery benefits beyond glycogen replenishment.
However, athletes who train two or three times a day or have less than 24 hours
to recover may want to consider eating or drinking a high-carbohydrate meal
631

immediately after finishing their event and at regular intervals thereafter to
quickly replenish glycogen stores.
Because prolonged aerobic endurance exercise breaks down muscle tissue,
protein should be included in the aerobic endurance athlete’s posttraining meal
to help start muscle building and repair, which may attenuate posttraining and
postevent muscle soreness (85). Consuming protein after training has another
benefit: It increases the rate of glycogen storage if carbohydrate intake is less
than 1.2 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per hour (61). In a
randomized, controlled trial, 18 elite orienteers participated in 13 exercise
sessions during one week. Half of the orienteers (the PRO-CON group) ingested
a protein drink before (0.3 g per kilogram body weight) and a protein-
carbohydrate drink (0.3 g protein per kilogram body weight + 1 g carbohydrate
per kilogram body weight) after training. The other half of participants consumed
an isocaloric carbohydrate-only beverage before and after exercise (CHO). Diet
was 
kept 
consistent 
throughout 
the 
study 
(15%/63%/22%
protein/carbohydrate/fat) except for the addition of the supplements. The basic
diet plus supplements provided 3 grams of protein per kilogram body weight per
day and 8.3 to 9.3 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day in
the PRO-CON group; the CHO group consumed 1.8 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day and 8.8 to 10.8 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight per day. A 4-kilometer (2.5 miles) run test was performed at the
beginning and end of the study and 2 hours after participants consumed a
standardized breakfast. PRO-CON significantly improved performance and
reduced markers of muscle breakdown, while CHO did not improve performance.
However, it is not clear from this study if the timing of protein made the
difference or the increased total daily intake of protein in the PRO-CON as
compared to the CHO group (48).
Other research does suggest that protein is important after aerobic endurance
exercise. For instance, a single-blind, randomized, triple-crossover design was
used to assess how different doses of a protein–leucine blend affected
myofibrillar protein fractional synthetic rate (FSR; muscle protein synthesis) in 12
aerobic endurance-trained men after 100 minutes of high-intensity cycling
(performed 3 hours after a standardized breakfast; diet the day before the test
was standardized based on calorie needs and provided the same percentage of
carbohydrate, protein, and fat for each subject). Cyclists consumed 70 g/15
g/180 g/30 g protein/leucine/ carbohydrate/fat, or 23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g, or 0 g/0
g/274 g/ 30 g (control) in four servings during the first 90 minutes of a 240-
minute (4-hour) recovery period. The lower-protein, lower-leucine supplement
(23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR by 33% ± 12% compared to the control
group, while additional protein and leucine (70 g/15 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR
632

by 51% ± 12% compared to the control group. Though no significant differences
were noted between the two protein and leucine groups, both fared better than
the placebo group, indicating that protein is important after a long, tough
workout (118). Given different workouts, exercise completed in a fasted or
unfasted state, and different doses of protein (10-96 g) used in other studies,
the precise minimum dose of protein needed to maximize FSR after aerobic
endurance exercise is not clear (21, 57). Additionally, it is not clear if maximizing
FSR in the time period immediately after aerobic endurance exercise will
translate to improved performance over time. And finally, the ideal time period
after aerobic endurance training during which protein should be consumed is not
clear and may depend on whether training was completed in a fasted or
unfasted state as well as on total daily protein intake. However, one study found
that delaying protein intake after aerobic endurance exercise by as little as 3
hours blunts its anabolic effects (77).
High-Intensity Intermittent Sports
Because athletes who participate in intermittent high-intensity sports—such as
basketball, hockey, and soccer—may play more than one game per day,
sometimes with just a few hours in between tournament games, immediate
recovery after a game is imperative for performance in their next game. And
when competing in sports that involve prolonged high-intensity intermittent
activity, such as soccer, American football, field and ice hockey, rugby, and
tennis, athletes may significantly reduce their muscle glycogen stores, leading to
muscular and cognitive fatigue (13). Fully replacing muscle glycogen before a
subsequent bout of exercise or competition may prolong time until fatigue and
improve performance. In a study designed to mimic a soccer game, Nicholas and
colleagues had six males complete the same exercise test separated by 22 hours
on two consecutive days—75 minutes of a prolonged, intermittent, high-intensity
shuttle run test after which they completed as many 20 meter (22 yd) shuttles as
possible (each shuttle alternated between jogging and sprinting). Subjects were
assigned to one of two diets for the 22-hour recovery period: a recovery diet
including 10 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight or an isocaloric
diet with more protein and fat than their normal daily diet. Intermittent running
capacity improved after the higher-carbohydrate diet as compared to the higher-
calorie condition with more protein and fat (94). Also, Balsom and colleagues
found that male study subjects performed significantly more work in both short-
term (<10 min) and prolonged (>30 min) high-intensity intermittent exercise
sessions after consuming a high- versus low-carbohydrate diet for the 48-hour
period before the exercise sessions (13).
633

High-intensity intermittent sports can lead to some degree of muscle damage
depending on many factors including the time and intensity of play and body
size. Studies show that consuming protein after exercise helps decrease some
markers of muscle damage (42). And though postexercise carbohydrate intake
can affect performance in a subsequent event or training session, particularly
when sessions are close together in time, the addition of protein will likely not
affect performance in a subsequent bout of exercise during the 4-hour recovery
period following the initial event or exercise session (85).
Strength and Power Sports
Athletes in strength and power sports rely on both blood glucose and glycogen
for energy during competition. Because a single bout of resistance training can
lead to significant reductions in glycogen (78) and decreases in glycogen can
impair force production and isometric strength while accentuating muscle
weakness, it is imperative that these athletes restore glycogen levels before their
next bout of exercise (47). During the recovery period after strength and power
competitions, athletes should focus on consuming higher-glycemic carbohydrates
immediately after exercise if they must compete or train again over the course of
the 24-hour period after the initial training session or competition. The amount
of carbohydrate they need to fully replenish glycogen stores depends on many
factors, including intensity and the time spent competing, their overall body
weight and muscle mass, their preexercise meal (and state of glycogen stores
before competition), and whether they consumed carbohydrate during the
competition. In a crossover study, after an overnight fast, eight men who
completed 6 sets of single-leg knee extensions at 70% of the 1RM, until 50% of
full knee extension was no longer possible, depleted glycogen levels by
approximately 29%. Within 6 hours of the completion of training, they restored
up to 91% of their preexercise levels after consuming 1.5 gram of carbohydrate
per kilogram body weight immediately after the resistance training session and
again 1 hour later. However, when study subjects consumed water only
immediately after training and again 1 hour later, they barely restored their
muscle glycogen content to 75% of preexercise levels (104).
Net protein balance depends on both muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown. And though carbohydrates have no effect on muscle protein
synthesis, they help attenuate acute protein breakdown resulting from resistance
exercise. The increase in protein breakdown likely depends on the resistance
stimulus, the person’s overall nutrition intake, and dietary intake before and
during training or competition. One study in untrained young men found that
acute protein breakdown increased by 51% ± 17% after a bout of resistance
training (16). In another study, the rate of both mixed muscle protein fractional
634

synthesis rate (muscle protein synthesis) and fractional breakdown rate
(breakdown) were measured after a bout of either concentric or eccentric
exercise in four untrained men and four untrained women. The rate of synthesis
increased significantly above resting levels by 112% in the 3-hour period after
exercise, 65% over the 24-hour period after exercise, and 34% over the 48-hour
period after exercise. Muscle breakdown also increased by 31% and 18% in the
3- and 24-hour periods after exercise yet returned to baseline by 48 hours after
exercise (110). Relatively small amounts of carbohydrate, somewhere between
30 and 100 grams, can sufficiently reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
Although muscle protein breakdown has a role in overall protein balance, muscle
protein synthesis plays a much bigger role in overall protein balance (43).
Supplementing with protein after a muscle-damaging bout of resistance
training increases acute muscle protein synthesis. Varying amounts of protein
have been used after resistance training to stimulate muscle protein synthesis,
though it appears that 20 to 50 grams (providing about 8.5 g-20 g of essential
amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine, fast protein (one that leads to a
rapid rise in amino acids in the bloodstream) in younger individuals may
maximally stimulate muscle protein synthesis, while 40 grams or more may be
necessary in older adults (59, 109). Rice protein is an intermediate-speed
leucine-poor protein (though the rise in leucine in the bloodstream appears
quickly after consumption of rice protein); larger doses of rice protein effectively
stimulate muscle protein synthesis to the same extent as a higher-quality protein
when matched for leucine content (67). Therefore, the leucine content of the
protein, and possibly the speed of leucine delivery, appears to be the
determining factor for acute changes in maximal stimulation of muscle protein
synthesis. A protein dose that contains 2 to 3 grams of leucine or 0.05 grams of
leucine per kilogram body weight will effectively stimulate muscle protein
synthesis in younger adults (96, 102, 136).
In addition to the acute increase in muscle protein synthesis, consistently
supplementing with protein after resistance training led to small to moderate
increases in muscle hypertrophy over time compared to conditions in which
subjects were not given protein supplements (27, 122). Only one study to date
has directly examined the relationship between acute measures of muscle
protein synthesis and hypertrophy due to resistance training. In this study 23
young men who were recreationally active but had not participated in a
resistance training exercise program in at least a year were tested for initial
strength and resting and postexercise rates of muscle protein synthesis. Then
they participated in a 16-week linear resistance training program consisting of
two days of lower body (e.g., leg press, leg extension, leg curl, and calf press)
and two days of upper body (e.g., chest press, shoulder press, seated row, lat
635

pulldown, biceps curl, triceps extension) exercises performed first thing in the
morning after an overnight fast. After exercise each day and at breakfast on
nontraining days they consumed a nutrition drink containing 30 grams of milk
protein, 25.9 grams of carbohydrate, and 3.4 grams of fat. The study authors
found no relationship between the acute rise (6 hours posttraining) in muscle
protein synthesis due to exercise training and the nutrition drink provided and
muscle hypertrophy. However, the authors also noted that changes in muscle
protein synthesis with training were not uniform between study subjects;
therefore, though acute changes in muscle protein synthesis are important for
muscle hypertrophy, they are not the sole factor that predicts a person’s
potential to increase muscle growth (86). Thirty grams of milk protein, as used in
this study, provides an estimated 24 grams of casein, 6 grams of whey protein,
and a total of 2.8 grams of leucine (139).
Concurrent Training
Exercise interference is a concept suggesting that aerobic endurance exercise,
when combined with resistance training (back-to-back sessions), blunts gains in
strength compared to resistance training alone but results in improvements in
aerobic endurance performance (148). While interest in concurrent training-
based research has increased over time, nutrition recommendations for
concurrent training are often based on isolated studies examining the impact of
nutrition interventions on aerobic endurance or resistance training alone. The
consumption of carbohydrate after aerobic endurance exercise and before lifting
can help suppress skeletal muscle breakdown. Also, given the impact of protein
intake after aerobic endurance exercise on muscle protein synthesis, as well as
the research suggesting that protein intake during prolonged (>2 h) resistance
training supports greater rates of muscle protein synthesis during exercise
compared to a carbohydrate control, athletes should consider consuming protein
after aerobic endurance exercise, before lifting, or during their lifting session if
performing aerobic endurance exercise first (107).
Daily Protein Intake
While ingestion of protein around training is beneficial for athletes to aid in
recovery and adaptation, this may have relatively little benefit if daily intake is
sufficient. For this reason, protein consumption with each meal represents an
ideal strategy to meet these needs and maintain a positive physiological
environment for athletes. Resistance training has the ability to increase muscle
sensitivity to amino acids for 24 to 48 hours after exercise whereas the anabolic
effect of a meal lasts approximately 3 to 5 hours. For optimal muscle remodeling,
experts suggest consuming at least 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal and
636

eating meals every 3 to 4 hours (81, 107) in order to facilitate meeting daily
protein targets.
The amount of data on muscle protein synthesis in children is limited because
invasive measurement procedures are required (17), and no studies have
examined muscle protein synthesis after training and postworkout protein
ingestion in healthy children. However, one thing is clear with regard to children:
Due to size differences as well as the impact of insulin and calorie intake on
protein synthesis, their per-meal protein intake targets will naturally be lower in
order to meet their protein needs (79), despite potentially having higher relative
needs. For more information about protein needs by sport, see table 11.3.
Nutrition for Various Performance Goals
Nutrition for Aerobic Endurance Performance and Recovery
•  Aerobic endurance athletes should aim to consume 8 to 10 grams of carbohydrate during their
most demanding training phases or competition and 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body
weight per day throughout their training.
•  Athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competition should include approximately 1 to 4
grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight (131). If the precompetition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight (120) and 0.15 to
0.25 grams of easily digestible protein per kilogram body weight.
•  Athletes should consume 28 to 144 grams of a mixture of multiple types of carbohydrate (e.g.,
sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin) per hour during prolonged aerobic endurance
exercise to extend time until exhaustion and improve performance (32, 34, 66, 137).
•  During prolonged activity in hot weather, athletes should consume sport drinks containing 20
to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium
(78-195 mg) per liter, and carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (2).
•  After exercise, approximately 1.2 to 2.0 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight
should be consumed within 30 minutes after stopping the exercise. The addition of protein appears
to facilitate glycogen replenishment if carbohydrate intake is below 1.2 grams per kilogram.
Additionally, some, though not all, studies show that the addition of protein to carbohydrate after a
workout may attenuate muscle breakdown and soreness and increase muscle protein synthesis.
The ideal amount of protein and the time period after exercise in which it should be consumed are
not clear based on the current body of literature and may depend on whether the exercise was
performed in the fed versus fasted state and on total calories consumed after a workout (44, 57,
85). However, as a general guideline, at least 20 to 40 grams of high-quality protein should also be
consumed within a 2-hour time period after aerobic endurance exercise (sooner may be better,
though the exact time period has yet to be elucidated in the research) (77).
•  Glycogen stores should be replenished after exercise and before the next bout of training. A
regular diet with sufficient carbohydrate intake can restore glycogen over the course of a 24-hour
period. For faster glycogen synthesis, athletes should eat or drink a high-carbohydrate meal
immediately after exercise and at regular intervals thereafter. This is especially important for
athletes who train again less than 24 hours after their initial training session (61).
Nutrition for Strength
637

•  Athletes should consider supplementing with carbohydrate before and during competition to
maintain strength and minimize muscle breakdown (47). In general, strength or speed athletes
should consume 5 to 6 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during peak
training periods. As little as 30 grams of carbohydrate after training may reduce muscle breakdown.
The ideal time period for carbohydrate consumption after resistance training has yet to be fully
clarified; however, consuming carbohydrate sooner (rather than waiting) may be more beneficial,
particularly if training was carried out in a fasted state (43).
•  Because low glycogen can impair muscle force, athletes should consume higher-energy
carbohydrates immediately following weightlifting or strength and power competitions if they must
compete or train again over the course of the 24-hour period after their initial competition.
Otherwise, they can consume enough carbohydrate over the course of the day to restore glycogen
levels before the next bout of training or competition (47, 104).
•  In general, strength or speed athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day, even if their sport or training includes an aerobic endurance
component. After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine protein
(2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximally stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109). If the exercise was performed in a
fasted state (first thing in the morning or more than 3 hours after the last protein-rich meal), the
protein should be consumed within 30 minutes after the end of the session; but if the exercise was
performed in a fed state (preexercise protein-rich meal or supplement), this postexercise time
window may be considerably longer (10).
•  Between 30 and 100 grams of high-energy carbohydrates should be consumed after muscle-
damaging exercise to reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 30 grams of a higher-leucine protein.
Nutrition for Hypertrophy
•  Ingestion of between 30 and 100 grams of energy-dense, moderate to high glycemic index
carbohydrates may be consumed after muscle-damaging exercise to help reduce muscle protein
breakdown (18, 43).
•  After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine protein
(>2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximally stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 40 grams of a higher-leucine protein
every 3 to 4 hours.
Nutrition for Muscular Endurance
•  Maintain adequate hydration by preventing water weight losses exceeding 2% of body weight.
•  During prolonged training or competition, consider a carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage to
delay fatigue and improve performance, particularly if performing after an overnight fast (6, 142).
•  Fully replace glycogen stores before the next training session or competition.
•  Consume protein after training or games to minimize muscle damage and soreness (42).
TABLE 11.3 Sport-Specific Protein Needs
638

Sport
Daily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weight
Sample daily
protein intake
Postexercise protein
needs
Postexercise
protein examples
Low to
moderate
aerobic
endurance
activity (e.g.,
jogging,
triathlon)
1.4-1.8
150 lb (68 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher-protein
Greek yogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chicken
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghetti with 4
oz (113 g)
meatballs (20 g
protein)
Salmon (6 oz
[170 g]) (34 g
protein)
0.2-0.5 g per kilogram
body weight
1 higher-protein
nutrition bar (20 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher-protein
Greek yogurt (18-
22 g protein)
Elite aerobic
endurance
athlete or one
who trains
intensely
>1.6
140 lb (64 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher-protein
Greek yogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chicken
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghetti with 6
oz (170 g)
meatballs (30 g
protein)
95% lean beef
(4 oz [113 g])
(30 g protein)
1/2 cup low-fat
cottage cheese
(12 g protein)
0.2-0.5 g per kilogram
body weight
20 fl oz (591 mL)
1% milk or
higher-protein soy
milk (20 g
protein)
1 scoop whey
protein (20-25 g
protein)
American
football
1.6-2.2, though
likely at the
upper end of this
range for those
playing at an
intense level
240 lb (109 kg)
individual:
5 large eggs (30
g protein)
Roast beef
sandwich (28 g
protein)
8 oz (227 g)
grilled salmon
Not clarified by research;
therefore, athletes may
want to follow the
guidelines for resistance
training and consume a
minimum of 30 g of a
fast, high-quality,
leucine-rich (2-3 g
leucine) protein
Tofu and berry
shake (1/2 cup
[125 g] tofu, 1
scoop soy protein
powder, 1/2 cup
[75 g] mixed
berries) (23 g
protein)
639

Sport
Daily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weight
Sample daily
protein intake
Postexercise protein
needs
Postexercise
protein examples
(45 g protein)
6 oz (170 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cooked
quinoa (50 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher-protein
Greek yogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
12 fl oz (355
mL) 1% milk
with 1 scoop
whey protein
(34 g protein)
1 scoop whey
protein with 4
tbsp (32 g)
powdered peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Gymnastics
Dietary restriction
increases protein
needs up to 2.2
(if they restrict
calories); no
studies
conducted on
gymnasts’ protein
needs
105 lb (48 kg)
individual:
3 large egg
omelet with 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(25 g protein)
5.3 oz (150 g)
Greek yogurt
with 1 oz (28 g)
almonds and
1/2 cup (75 g)
berries (18 g
protein)
Chicken
shawarma wrap
(4 oz [113 g]
grilled chicken,
1 whole wheat
pita, 2 tbsp [30
g] hummus [37
g protein])
3 oz (85 g)
shrimp with 1/2
cup (85 g) black
beans (29 g
protein)
0.2-0.5 g per kilogram
body weight
1 cup (210 g) low-
fat cottage cheese
with 1/2 cup (75
g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)
2 scoops (60 g)
plant-based
protein powder, 1
cup (237 mL)
almond milk, 1
tbsp (15 g) chia
seeds (28 g
protein)
Team sports
Likely 1.6-2.0 g,
depending on the
sport and
165 lb (75 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan for
~0.2-0.5 g per kg per
hour (minimum of 20 g)
1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
640

Sport
Daily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weight
Sample daily
protein intake
Postexercise protein
needs
Postexercise
protein examples
intensity of
exercise
the elite aerobic
endurance athlete
above and add
5 oz (142 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cooked
quinoa (43 g
protein)
milk (30 g
protein)
Weightlifting
1.6-2.0
212 lb (96 kg)
individual:
4 large eggs
omelet with 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(30 g protein)
6 oz (170 g)
grilled salmon
with 1 cup (185
g) cooked
quinoa (42 g
protein)
6 oz (170 g)
sirloin steak (46
g protein)
6 oz (170 g)
shrimp, 1/2 cup
(85 g) black
beans, 2 soft
taco size whole
grain tortillas
(58 g protein)
Studies have used 20-70
g protein in close
temporal proximity to
resistance exercise,
though a protein
containing approximately
2-3 g leucine per serving
of protein is
recommended
1 scoop egg or
whey protein (or 2
scoops plant-
based protein)
with 4 tbsp (32 g)
powdered peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Wrestling
2.2, though
dietary restriction
increases protein
needs
190 lb (86 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan for
the weightlifter, but
add the following:
1 cup (210 g)
low-fat cottage
cheese, 1/2 cup
(75 g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)
0.2-0.5 g per kilogram
(minimum of 20 g of
high-quality protein)
1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
milk (28 g
protein) or 2
scoops of whey
protein in water
(30-44 g protein)
641

Nutrition Strategies for Altering Body
Composition
Athletes who want to alter their body composition typically need to gain muscle,
lose body fat, or both. Although there are some scenarios (typically in those with
eating disorders) in which an athlete may need to gain both muscle and fat, this
section focuses on gaining muscle and losing body fat.
The first step toward altering body composition involves estimating calorie
needs (though calorie is the common term, the technical term is kilocalorie).
The number of calories an athlete needs each day depends on a number of
factors including genetics, body weight, body composition, training program, and
age. Children and adolescents also need calories for growth and development.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is by far the largest contributor to total energy
expenditure, accounting for approximately 65% to 70% of daily energy
expenditure (63, 114). It is a measure of the calories required for maintaining
normal body functions such as respiration, blood circulation, and gastrointestinal
and renal processing. Basal metabolic rate and resting metabolic rate (RMR)
are often used interchangeably, though they are slightly different. Basal
metabolic rate is measured after an overnight fast (12-14 h without food) with
the subject resting supine and motionless but awake (2, 40). Resting metabolic
rate is often used instead of BMR due to the ease of measurement (an overnight
fast is not required), yet it is 10% to 20% higher than BMR due to increased
energy expenditure resulting from recent food intake or physical activity
completed earlier in the day. Several factors influence BMR and RMR, particularly
fat-free mass, which explains approximately 70% to 80% of the difference in
RMR among individuals (93, 115, 138). Other factors include age, nutrition
status, genetics, and differences in endocrine functioning (such as hypo- or
hyperthyroidism).
The second-largest component of an individual’s energy requirement is the
energy expended in physical activity. Of all the components, it is the most
variable among individuals. The number of calories expended through physical
activity increases with the frequency, intensity, and duration of the training
program, as well as nontraining daily activity (e.g., washing a car or doing
housework). Typically, 20% to 30% of total daily energy expenditure is from
physical activity, though this figure may be considerably higher in athletes (63,
114). The highest energy costs are seen in aerobic activities performed by large
athletes for long periods of time, whereas the lowest energy costs are associated
with skill and power sports performed by smaller athletes.
642

The thermic effect of food, also known as diet-induced thermogenesis, is
the increase in energy expenditure above the RMR that can be measured for
several hours following a meal. The thermic effect of food includes the energy
cost of digestion, absorption, metabolism, and storage of food in the body. The
thermic effect of food accounts for approximately 10% to 15% of total calories
burned each day (63, 114).
Many different equations can be used to calculate calorie needs, including the
Cunningham equation and equations by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which
are prediction equations. The various IOM equations take sex, body weight,
height, age, and physical activity levels into account to predict the estimated
energy requirement (EER) (138). RMR can then be multiplied by an activity
factor from 1.2 (sedentary) to 1.9 (heavy physical activity) to predict energy
requirements (50). However, these equations do not take into account how
muscle mass affects RMR (90). The Cunningham equation takes fat-free mass
(FFM) into account to estimate RMR, making it more applicable to athletes (135).
RMR = 500 + 22 (FFM in kg)
After using the Cunningham equation to estimate RMR based on FFM, an activity
factor can be used to estimate total daily energy expenditure. Instead of using a
basic activity factor, the strength and conditioning professional may choose to
use metabolic equivalents (MET values), an estimate of caloric expenditure
during activity. One MET is the energy equivalent of sitting quietly; therefore, the
greater the intensity of exercise, the higher the MET value (5).
Another, more laborious method that can be used by very motivated athletes
is to record dietary intake for a minimum of three consecutive, representative
days during a period of stable body weight. The individual’s daily energy
requirement is assumed to equal the average number of calories consumed each
day. The pitfall of this method is that recording food intake usually alters normal
eating habits and people do not always accurately record their food intake (55,
121). Finally, a very simple method for quickly assessing calorie needs is
presented in table 11.4 (24).
Weight Gain
An athlete’s ability to gain weight depends on numerous factors; the ones that
can be controlled include diet and training. The off-season should be used as a
time to make dietary changes that focus on weight gain since athletes do not
have the pressures of competition on their mind.
If athletes increase their calorie intake dramatically and consistently, they
could gain more fat than they would like. A general guideline, which should be
adjusted based on the athlete, is to consume approximately 500 additional
calories per day in order to gain weight (113). Eating larger portion sizes,
643

increasing meal frequency, and focusing on choosing calorie-dense foods are all
strategies that can help an athlete gain weight. In addition to increasing total
calorie intake, athletes should ensure that they are eating enough protein to
maximize gains in lean body mass: 1.6 to 2.2 grams per kilogram body weight
per day. Increasing an athlete’s protein intake may make weight gain tough,
given the profound effect that protein has on satiety, as well as the increased
thermic effect of feeding associated with higher-protein diets. However,
overfeeding protein is advantageous if the athlete can sustain the diet. In a
randomized, controlled overfeeding study, 16 healthy adults lived in a metabolic
ward for eight weeks and were overfed a diet containing low (5% of total
calories), normal (15% of total calories), or high (25% of total calories) protein.
The subjects who consumed the normal- and high-protein diet stored
approximately 45% of the excess calories as lean body mass, whereas those on
the low-protein diet stored 95% of the excess calories consumed as body fat
(20). In addition to making dietary changes, athletes who want to gain weight
should consider supplementing with creatine monohydrate, a supplement that
safely and effectively increases lean body weight (73).
TABLE 11.4 Physical Activity Level Values and Activity
Coefficients
Physical activity
level (PAL)*
Examples
Physical activity coefficient
(males/females)
Sedentary (≥1.0 to
<1.4)
Common activities of daily living (ADLs)
1.00/1.00
Low active (≥1.4 to
<1.6)
ADLs and 30-60 min of daily moderate activity
1.11/1.12
Active (≥1.6 to
<1.9)
ADLs and ≥1 h of daily moderate activity
1.25/1.27
Very active (≥1.9 to
<2.5)
ADLs and ≥ 1 h of daily moderate activity and 1
more h of vigorous activity or 2 h of moderate
activity
1.48/1.45
*PAL = ratio of energy expenditure to basal daily energy expenditure (“1.0” means total energy expenditure
equals basal daily energy expenditure).
Reprinted by permission from L.M. Burke and E.S. Rawson, “Fueling and Nutrition,” in NSCA’s Essentials of
Sport Science, edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by D.N. French and L. Torres
Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 366.
Finally, though athletes may know their energy and protein needs, putting this
knowledge into practice can be perplexing. Therefore, regular nutrition
counseling (or coaching) by a sports dietitian or sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree is a recommended strategy for facilitating greater weight gain.
644

A study of 21 elite athletes with heavy training loads, who were randomized to
receive nutrition counseling or to eat ad libitum, showed that over the course of
the 8- to 12-week weight gain period, the group receiving dietary counseling had
greater total and lean body mass gains during the intervention and after 12
months; this means that the group receiving nutrition counseling continued to
benefit from the nutrition guidance for several months after counseling ended
(41).
Weight (Fat) Loss
Athletes participating in a variety of sports may need to lose body fat to improve
aspects of performance such as speed or aerobic endurance. Plus, regulating
body weight may give certain athletes a mental advantage going into
competition (108). Additionally, maintaining or making weight is a recurring
aspect of sports that include weight classes, weight limitations, or judging based
on appearance such as weightlifting, wrestling, boxing, lightweight crew, and
gymnastics.
Despite diet books on the bestseller lists, there is no ideal diet that works for
everyone. Instead, studies show that a variety of types of diets, including low-
carbohydrate and low-fat diets, result in weight loss as long as the people
following them are consuming fewer calories than needed to maintain weight.
Additionally, there appears to be no difference between the amount of weight
loss on a low-carbohydrate as compared to a low-fat (and therefore higher-
carbohydrate) diet (19, 39). Total calorie intake and dietary adherence, the
ability to stick with a diet over time, are the two most important factors that
predict successful weight loss. However, a good portion of weight loss during
dieting may come from muscle (144). Further, because muscle protein synthesis
is an energy-expensive process, during times of dieting caloric restriction may
decrease muscle protein synthesis. Athletes who want to maintain muscle and
lose body fat while dieting should consume about 1.8 to 2.7 grams protein per
kilogram body weight per day (or approximately 2.3-3.1 g protein per kilogram
fat-free mass per day) in addition to maintaining a moderate energy deficit of
approximately 500 calories per day (91).
There is no one ideal diet. Instead, athletes need to choose a
dietary approach based on whether it is safe for them, contains
enough protein to meet their needs, and fits their lifestyle so that
they can easily adhere to it.
To be sustainable in the long term, diets should be individualized; be easy to
adhere to; and take into account lifestyle habits, medical history (including
645

diabetes, insulin resistance, other diseases, and medical concerns), diet history,
and food preferences while providing all of the nutrients an athlete needs to train
and perform optimally. Additionally, research shows that ongoing behavior
therapy and support can improve long-lasting results (80).
Overweight and Obesity
Overweight and obesity, both of which reflect an accumulation of excess body
fat, increase a person’s risk of morbidity from hypertension; dyslipidemia;
coronary artery disease; gallbladder disease; stroke; type 2 diabetes; sleep
apnea; osteoarthritis; respiratory problems; and endometrial, breast, prostate,
and colon cancers (92). Obesity is categorized as a disease and affects 34.9% of
adults and 17% of children in the United States (96). At a population level,
overweight and obesity are typically classified based on a body mass index
(BMI) of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 and ≥30 kg/m2, respectively (table 11.5). However,
this evaluative approach may have very little applicability to athletes. In reality,
BMI is a measure of excess weight as opposed to excess body fat (92) because it
cannot distinguish between excess fat and muscle or bone mass (26). Therefore,
BMI can overestimate body fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and
underestimate body fat in older persons or those who have lost muscle mass
(95). Finally, age, sex, ethnicity, and muscle mass affect the association between
BMI and body fat. Strength and conditioning professionals should use other more
accurate measures of body composition such as skinfolds, air displacement
plethysmography (ADP), multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis, or
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) in athletes with more muscle than
their age- and sex-matched counterparts (74).
The causes of obesity are complex and include an interaction of genes and
environment, involving social, behavioral, cultural, metabolic, physiological, and
genetic factors. However, many treatment options are effective, including dietary
therapy, altering physical activity patterns, behavior therapy techniques,
pharmacotherapy, and surgery. Some patients and clinicians employ a
combination of these treatments. The initial goal for weight loss in overweight
and obese individuals should be 10% of initial weight within six months (92).
Additionally, target body weight can be calculated using body fat percentage
and FFM (i.e., target body weight = fat free mass/[100 percent desired percent
body fat]). Where desired, percent body fat is based on measurement type (e.g.,
ADP, DXA, skinfolds) and team, sport, and position-specific normative body
composition data.
Low-Carbohydrate Diets
646

The popularity and effectiveness of low-carbohydrate diets may have less to do with cutting
carbohydrates (in healthy individuals) and more to do with a temporary decrease in water weight,
cutting calories, and increasing protein intake. When people significantly reduce their carbohydrate
intake, they deplete their glycogen stores (carbohydrate stored with three to four parts water) and
therefore quickly drop pounds from water weight. Once carbohydrates are reintroduced into the
diet, they can rapidly gain the weight back (71).
Over time, however, low-carbohydrate diets may work for some people because of the
consumption of increased levels of protein. Protein increases feelings of fullness (satiety) in a dose-
dependent manner—the more protein consumed at one sitting, the greater its effect on satiety.
However, at this time the “optimal dose” for maximum satiety remains unclear. Protein also
increases the thermic effect of feeding. More calories are burned during digesting and processing
protein than carbohydrate or fat. And finally, protein helps spare metabolically active lean muscle
tissue during weight loss. This is important because muscle burns a few more calories at rest than
fat does, and over time this can affect body weight. Plus, more muscle may mean that a person
can train harder and therefore burn more calories during training (91).
Though cutting carbohydrates may be detrimental for a number of competitive athletes,
particularly during precompetition and competition phases, it is a very effective approach for
someone with insulin resistance (a condition that leads to the buildup of glucose in the blood
because the body does not use insulin effectively) as well as type 2 diabetes. It may also be an
effective approach for overweight and obese individuals (51, 54, 149).
No single body fat measure should be used to assess health, disease, or
disease risk (26). Overweight and obesity combined with other risk factors,
including high blood pressure, high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, high triglycerides, high blood glucose, physical
inactivity, family history of premature heart disease, or cigarette smoking,
increase a person’s risk for heart disease (92).
Although all obese individuals share the trait of excess body fat, they cannot
be treated homogeneously. They must be screened for coexisting illnesses such
as diabetes, orthopedic problems, cardiac disease, psychological disorders such
as binge-eating disorder or depression, social and cultural influences, and
readiness for change. Obese athletes who are mandated to lose weight (e.g., by
a physician) pose a special challenge because losing weight is dictated by an
external source and is not an internalized goal. Weight loss takes a great deal of
dedication from within the individual, and these athletes may need to work
closely with a mental health professional or registered dietitian to help them
meet their goal.
TABLE 11.5 Classification of Adult Weight by Body Mass Index
(BMI) and Associated Disease Risk
647

Classification
Obesity
class
BMIa
(kg/m2)
DISEASE RISKb RELATIVE TO NORMAL
WEIGHT AND WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
Men <102 cm (<40
in)
Women <88 cm (<35
in)
Men >102 cm (>40
in)
Women >88 cm (>35
in)
Severely
underweight
<16.5
Underweight
<18.5
Normal
18.5-24.9
Overweight
25.0-29.9
Increased
High
Obesity
I
30.0-34.9
High
Very high
II
35.0-39.9
Very high
Very high
Extreme obesity
III
≥40
Extremely high
Extremely high
Note: Increased waist circumference can also be a marker for increased risk even in persons of normal
weight.
aBMI may overestimate fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and underestimate fat in older
persons and others who have lost muscle. To estimate BMI using kilograms and meters, use this equation:
body weight (kilograms) / height (meters)2. To estimate BMI using pounds and inches, use this equation:
body weight (pounds) / height (inches)2 × 703.
bDisease risk for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
Reprinted from NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative Expert Panel on the Identification, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Obesity in Adults (1998).
Rapid Weight Loss
Though there is no uniform definition in the literature, rapid weight loss generally
refers to quick weight loss, faster than can be achieved by lowering calorie
intake and increasing exercise, in a short period of time (38). Athletes may use a
variety of techniques to cut weight quickly to compete in a desired weight class,
meet a weight goal set by their coach, or improve performance. Potentially
dangerous weight loss techniques may include fasting, fad diets, voluntary
dehydration (diuretics, sauna, water and salt manipulation, wearing multiple
layers of clothing), excessive spitting, self-induced vomiting, laxative abuse, and
inappropriate or excessive use of thermogenic aids (38).
Athletes who attempt to lose too much weight too quickly may lose lean body
mass, feel fatigued, experience headaches or mood swings, put their training
and performance in jeopardy, and suffer from several potentially serious side
effects. These include dehydration, heat illness, muscle cramping, fatigue,
dizziness, suppressed immune system functioning, hormone imbalances,
hyperthermia, reduced muscle strength, decreased plasma and blood volume,
648

low blood pressure, electrolyte imbalances, kidney failure (diuretic abuse),
fainting, and death (in extreme cases) (38).
The strength and conditioning professional should be able to recognize the
signs and symptoms associated with rapid weight loss techniques and refer
athletes to the appropriate professional while also communicating concerns to
the rest of the coaching staff. In addition, the strength and conditioning
professional may want to consider documenting the steps he or she has taken to
assist the athlete (for good record keeping and to prevent liability) while also
working with a medical doctor or registered dietitian to set appropriate weight
goals after body composition, dieting, medical, and eating disorder history have
been taken into account. Some athletes may need to reconsider which weight
class they are competing in if they cannot make weight without putting their
health or performance in jeopardy.
649

Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) encompasses various
physiological dysfunctions resulting from low energy availability (LEA), where an
athlete’s energy intake does not match the energy expended during exercise.
This mismatch affects metabolic rate, menstrual function, bone health, immunity,
protein synthesis, and cardiovascular health, among others. This phenomenon
was initially recognized in 2014 with the international RED-S consensus
statement (88) and has continued to encompass additional research. For more
details on the implications of RED-S, see these previous papers (25, 89).
LEA is quantified by energy availability (EA), calculated as energy intake
minus exercise energy expenditure, relative to fat-free mass (FFM). Optimal EA
for healthy function is around 45 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day, while
severe perturbations can occur below 30 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day
(25, 88). LEA adversely affects various systems, including the endocrine system,
leading to disruptions in hormonal balance, particularly in female athletes, and
possibly in males, though male athletes appear to be more physiologically
resilient at lower EA values. LEA may be one of the strongest indicators of injury
risk for athletes (133), with oligomenorrheic and functional hypothalamic
amenorrheic 
(FHA) 
athletes 
reporting 
higher 
percentages 
of 
severe
musculoskeletal injuries resulting in greater durations of time lost from sport
(134).
Menstrual dysfunction, including amenorrhea, is a common consequence of
sustained LEA in female athletes, due to the impact on the hypothalamic–
pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis. Chronic LEA also compromises bone health,
leading to decreased bone mineral density and increased risk of bone stress
injuries, particularly in sports with high energy demands. Metabolic changes,
including decreased RMR, and hematological alterations, such as iron deficiency,
are also associated with LEA. Growth and development, cardiovascular function,
gastrointestinal health, and immune function are also affected, particularly at
very low levels of LEA and over longer periods of time. Psychological implications
include increased risk of depression, eating disorders, and impaired stress
management.
Performance-wise, LEA can impair recovery, muscle function, and glycogen
storage, affecting physical and psychological capacity, training quality, and injury
risk (89). However, despite these associations, direct evidence of LEA’s impact on
sport performance is limited. Studies on elite athletes suggest that LEA may
impair sport performance indirectly by acutely affecting fuel storage and use
(132), reducing training volume, and increasing risk of illness (35, 36). Yet
further research with robust protocols is needed to fully understand the acute
650

and chronic effects of LEA on athletic performance. Recognizing and addressing
LEA is crucial for optimizing athlete health, performance, and long-term well-
being. Health care practitioners and coaches should be vigilant for signs of LEA
and its associated health implications, implementing strategies to mitigate risks
and support athletes in achieving optimal energy balance and performance
outcomes.
651

Feeding and Eating Disorders
Eating disorders, including binge-eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, and
bulimia nervosa, are serious mental health disorders that can affect both men
and women, appear at any point in life, and increase risk of mortality. Those with
eating disorders have a high prevalence of other psychiatric disorders, including
anxiety disorders, mood disorders such as depression, impulse-control disorders,
and substance abuse disorders (49, 58).
Studies show an increased prevalence of both disordered eating and
eating disorders in athletes compared to controls (45, 128, 151). In particular,
athletes in sports with weight classes such as wrestling, those in sports that
emphasize leanness such as cross country running, and aesthetic sports such as
gymnastics may be more prone to disordered eating and eating disorders (45,
128, 151). Signs of disordered eating may include restrictive eating; fasting;
skipping meals; and taking diet pills, laxatives, or diuretics. However, those with
disordered eating do not meet the full diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder
(45).
Eating disorders are multifactorial diseases and, as such, require a
multidisciplinary team approach. The strength and conditioning professional must
be aware of signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and have a referral
network in place so athletes can get the psychological, medical, and nutrition
help they need from experts who work with eating disorders.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characterized by a distorted body image and an intense fear
of gaining weight or becoming fat, leading those with this disease to excessive
calorie restriction and severe weight loss (8). Those with anorexia nervosa also
put a great deal of emphasis on their weight or shape yet do not recognize the
seriousness of their illness. Also, people with anorexia nervosa typically engage
in ritualistic behaviors including repeated weighing, cutting food into small
pieces, and carefully portioning their food (92).
Two subtypes fall under anorexia nervosa. The restricting type does not
regularly binge eat or purge, while the binge-eating or purging type regularly
engages in binge eating or purging.
The incidence peaks in the early 20s for both males and females, and the
lifetime prevalence in females ages 10 to 39 years ranges from 0.21% to 0.89%,
and in males ages 10 to 39 years it ranges from 0.19% to 0.67% (143).
Estimates based on data modeling reveal that 14% of females with anorexia
nervosa and 28.2% of males seek treatment (143). It is important to note that
among all mental health disorders, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality
652

rate (49, 143). For more information about anorexia nervosa, the reader is
encouraged to read the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-V) (8).
Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Extremely restricted eating
Intense and excessive exercise
Extreme thinness (emaciation)
A relentless pursuit of thinness and unwillingness to maintain a healthy weight
Intense fear of gaining weight
Distorted body image or self-image
Denial of the seriousness of low body weight
Serious Health Consequences of Anorexia Nervosa
Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis)
Mild anemia
Muscle wasting and weakness
Delayed puberty
Severe constipation
Low blood pressure
Slowed breathing and pulse
Damage to the structure and function of the heart
Feeling tired all the time
Infertility
Brain damage
Multiple organ failure
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Previously categorized under “eating disorder not otherwise specified,” binge-
eating disorder has its own category in the DSM-V (8). Binge-eating disorder is
characterized by repeated episodes, occurring at least once a week for a period
of three weeks, of uncontrolled binge eating (eating significantly more food in a
short period of time than most people would eat under the same circumstances)
(55). The binge-eating episodes are associated with three or more of the
following:
Eating much more rapidly than normal
653

Eating until feeling uncomfortably full
Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry
Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating
Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward (55)
Because binge-eating episodes are not followed by purging, as is the case
with bulimia nervosa, people with binge-eating disorder are often overweight or
obese. The lifetime prevalence for males ages 10 to 39 years is estimated to be
0.69% to 1.93% and 1.08% to 3.14% in females of the same age, with peak
onset in the early to mid-20s (143). A lifetime prevalence of binge-eating
disorder is associated with morbid obesity (BMI >40). Over the course of a
lifetime, it is estimated that approximately 30% of males and 29.7% of females
with binge-eating disorder receive treatment (143). Binge eating is associated
with significant physical and psychological problems. Additionally, people with
binge-eating disorder may feel embarrassed, guilty, or disgusted with their
behavior and may attempt to hide their behavior by eating alone (55).
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characterized by recurrent consumption of food in amounts
significantly greater than would customarily be consumed in a discrete period of
time—for example, an entire pizza and a half-gallon of ice cream, plus a package
of cookies. Purging follows episodes of binge eating and may include one or
more of the following: self-induced vomiting, intense exercise, laxative use, or
diuretic use. The bingeing and purging occur at least once a week for a period of
three months (55). People with bulimia nervosa feel a lack of control over their
eating during binge episodes and are more likely to be normal weight as
opposed to underweight, are unhappy with their weight and body, and fear
weight gain. Average age of onset for bulimia nervosa is in the early 20s, and
the lifetime prevalence is 0.08% to 0.30% in males ages 10 to 39 and 0.56% to
1.7% in females of the same age range. Approximately 15.7% of males and
17.7% of females are estimated to receive treatment (143). For more
information about bulimia, the reader is encouraged to refer to DSM-V (84).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) is an eating or feeding
disturbance, including apparent lack of interest in eating or food; avoidance
based on the sensory characteristics of food; or concern about aversive
consequences of eating. This disorder is manifested by persistent failure to meet
appropriate nutritional or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the
following (55):
654

Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain or
faltering growth in children)
Significant nutritional deficiency
Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements
Marked interference with psychosocial functioning
The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food or by
associated culturally sanctioned practice.
The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance
in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced.
The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical condition or
not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance
occurs in the context of another condition or disorder, the severity of the eating
disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and
warrants additional clinical attention (55).
Pica
People with pica eat nonnutritive substances for a period of at least one month.
Common nonnutritive substances include clay, laundry starch, ice, cigarette
butts, hair, or chalk (68). Those with pica may have electrolyte and metabolic
disorders, intestinal obstruction, wearing away of tooth enamel, and
gastrointestinal problems, among other issues. Testing for anemia is
recommended since pica is associated with iron deficiency (68).
Rumination Disorder
Rumination involves chewing, reswallowing, or spitting of regurgitated food. To
be classified as having this disorder, one must display this behavior, unrelated to
any medical condition, for at least one month. Rumination disorder can occur
alongside other eating issues or disorders (55).
Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Vomiting
Taking laxatives
Exercising excessively
Fasting
Serious Health Consequences of Bulimia Nervosa
Chronically inflamed and sore throat
655

Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area
Worn tooth enamel, increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth
Acid reflux disorder and other gastrointestinal problems
Intestinal distress and irritation
Severe dehydration
Electrolyte imbalance
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Eating Disorders: Management and Care
It is not the responsibility of the strength and conditioning professional to treat
or diagnose an eating disorder. It is his or her ethical responsibility to assist the
athlete in attaining the proper diagnosis from a qualified physician and treatment
from a qualified treatment team. Therefore, strength and conditioning
professionals should be mindful of the symptoms of each eating disorder as well
as signs of disordered eating. Keep in mind that abnormal eating patterns and
amenorrhea alone are not indicative of an eating disorder. A professional who is
experienced and qualified in diagnosing and treating eating disorders should be
contacted when an athlete’s behavior is concerning.
Eating Disorder Resources
National Eating Disorders Association
www.nationaleatingdisorders.org
International Association of Eating Disorders Professionals
www.iaedp.com
The Renfrew Center Foundation
www.renfrewcenter.com
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders
www.anad.org
The Meadows Ranch
www.meadowsranch.com
The strength and conditioning professional is not responsible for
treating eating disorders but instead should be aware of the
symptoms associated with an eating disorder and refer athletes to
the appropriate professional.
656

Conclusion
The primary role of nutrition in strength and conditioning is to support athletic
performance. A general understanding of nutrition principles and applications is
essential for strength and conditioning professionals so that they can provide
consistent, accurate information to their athletes while also being able to identify
the potential signs and symptoms of an eating disorder. And though pre-,
during-, and postcompetition nutrition can lead to better performance, a
nutritionally sound daily diet should be emphasized as well for overall health,
greater training adaptations, and performance.
KEY TERMS
amenorrhea
anabolic window
anorexia nervosa
basal metabolic rate (BMR)
binge-eating disorder
body mass index (BMI)
bulimia nervosa
calorie
carbohydrate-electrolyte (carbohydrate) drink
carbohydrate loading
creatine kinase
diet-induced thermogenesis
disordered eating
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
eating disorders
energy availability (EA)
exogenous
isocaloric
kilocalorie
obesity
net protein balance
precompetition meal
relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)
resting metabolic rate (RMR)
target body weight
voluntary dehydration
657

STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is a key strategy for precompetition nutrition in
athletes?
  a.  consuming high-fat and high-fiber foods to promote satiety
  b.  choosing carbohydrates and fluid to maximize energy and hydration
  c.  avoiding protein intake before competition to prevent muscle soreness
  d.  trying new foods during practice sessions to minimize stomach
discomfort
  2.  Which of the following statements about nutrition during aerobic
endurance events and intermittent-activity sports is accurate?
  a.  Protein intake has no impact on performance or muscle damage.
  b.  Athletes should avoid consuming carbohydrates during prolonged
exercise to prevent stomach discomfort.
  c.  Proper hydration and carbohydrate intake are essential to maintain
performance and prevent dehydration.
  d.  Sport drinks with a carbohydrate concentration higher than 10% are
ideal for quick absorption.
  3.  What are the recommended amounts of carbohydrate and protein intake
for aerobic endurance athletes during their most demanding training
phases or competition?
  a.  carbohydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body weight per day;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body weight per day
  b.  carbohydrate: 8 to 10 grams per kilogram body weight per day;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body weight per day
  c.  carbohydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body weight within 30
minutes after exercise; protein: 10 to 40 grams within a 32-hour time
period after aerobic endurance exercise
  d.  carbohydrate: 28 to 140 grams per hour during prolonged aerobic
endurance exercise; protein: 1.5 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body
weight within 30 minutes after exercise
4. What are the recommended macronutrient intakes for strength or speed
athletes during peak training periods?
a. carbohydrate: 1.4 to 1.7 grams per kilogram body weight per day;
protein: 5 to 6 grams per kilogram body weight per day
b. carbohydrate: 30 to 100 grams immediately following weightlifting or
strength competitions; protein: 20 to 30 grams of high-leucine protein
every 3 to 4 hours
c. carbohydrate: 5 to 6 grams per kilogram body weight per day; protein:
1.4 to 1.8 grams per kilogram body weight per day
658
