CHAPTER 12
PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING
SUBSTANCES AND METHODS
Bill I. Campbell, PhD, and Nathaniel D.M.
Jenkins, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jay R. Hoffman
and Jeffrey R. Stout to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
provide reliable and up-to-date information to athletes on the
risks and benefits of performance-enhancing substances,
including anabolic steroids, selective androgen receptor
modulators, and peptides;
understand the efficacy and adverse effects of over-the-counter
dietary supplements marketed to athletes for enhancing sport
and exercise performance;
determine which performance-enhancing supplements are
beneficial for strength and power performance, aerobic
endurance performance, or both; and
distinguish between those performance-enhancing supplements
that mimic the effects of hormones in the body and those that
improve performance through some other means.
659

Athletes who choose to use performance-enhancing substances do
so with the hope that they will augment their training adaptations
and ultimately improve their sport performance (181). Ideally,
performance-enhancing substances also support the health of the
athlete and are within the ethical and stated guidelines of the
athlete’s sport. Because of the ethical considerations relating to
unfair advantage during competition and the potential for adverse
events, most athletic governing bodies have generated a list of
substances that are banned from national and international
competition. Athletes caught using such substances can be
suspended or forced to forfeit their medals or both. In situations in
which the athlete tests positive for a banned substance on repeated
occasions, he or she risks a lifetime ban on participation in the given
sport. However, numerous nutritional supplements and ergogenic
aids are permissible and are frequently used by athletes to maximize
performance enhancement. Often the use of these substances is
promoted on the basis of unfounded claims (181). Another concern
that athletes need to be aware of with the use of dietary
supplements is the risk of unintended doping originating from
contaminated products. The presence of undeclared compounds in
the composition of dietary supplements is a serious concern (131).
Thus, it is imperative that the athlete become informed about the
legality of these substances, understand the potential risks
associated with consumption, and know whether scientific research
supports the claims (i.e., the efficacy of the product). The strength
and conditioning professional can greatly assist athletes in this
regard by giving them relevant information related to these issues,
as well as by referring them to nutrition specialists. Although an
ergogenic aid can be any substance, mechanical aid, or training
method that improves sport performance, for the purposes of this
chapter the term refers specifically to pharmacologic aids.
Athletes may try to gain a competitive advantage by using
supplements that are reputed to be ergogenic but are not banned,
or they may knowingly use banned substances in the belief that they
660

can stay ahead of the drug testers (181). A consequence may be
that athletes who would normally refrain from using these
substances may feel pressured to use them just to stay abreast of
their competitors. However, athletes who are well informed can
confidently ignore useless and possibly harmful products despite
what their fellow athletes claim. It may also be possible to steer
athletes away from the use of banned drugs if they are aware of the
risks to their health and safety and are aware that competitors who
cheat run a high risk of being detected.
Athletes should focus on using appropriately periodized strength
and conditioning methods and sound nutritional practices designed
to enhance performance. If these two factors are addressed, at that
point the athlete can consider using sport supplements or ergogenic
aids. It is important that athletes seek guidance from appropriate
professionals to make sure that what they are considering is both
legal and efficacious.
An athlete’s first priority should be to apply sound
principles of training, including adequate nutrition,
before using any nutritional supplement or ergogenic
aid. Before purchasing or consuming a product, an
athlete 
should 
seek 
guidance 
from 
qualified
professionals to make sure the choice is legal, safe, and
effective.
661

Types of Performance-Enhancing
Substances
This chapter discusses two categories of performance-enhancing
substances: hormones and the drugs that mimic their effects and
dietary supplements. Certain hormones, such as testosterone, play
an integral role in the adaptive response to strength and
conditioning activities; others, such as epinephrine, are important for
energy mobilization during training. These and several other types of
hormones are covered more extensively in the next part of this
chapter. The distinction between a performance-enhancing drug and
a dietary supplement is not intuitively obvious. For example,
caffeine, which is found in many beverages such as coffee, is
categorized as a drug. The distinction between a drug and a dietary
supplement affects whether a product meets United States Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approval for safety and effectiveness. If a
product is not classified as a drug or advertised as having
therapeutic value, FDA regulations concerning its sale are relatively
relaxed. This means that any manufacturer can introduce a new
dietary supplement to the market without special approval and that
the FDA will not investigate its safety or effectiveness unless a health
risk is brought to the agency’s attention (76). The FDA’s definition of
a drug encompasses substances that change the body’s structure or
function. This includes substances that stimulate hormone secretion.
Additionally, if a compound is administered differently from the way
in which foods would be consumed, it may be classified as a drug.
The 
distinction 
between 
a 
drug 
and 
a 
dietary
supplement is linked to FDA approval for safety and
effectiveness.
Generally, dietary supplements are highly refined products that
should not be confused with a food. They may not have any positive
662

nutritional value; hence they are not referred to as nutritional
supplements. Carbohydrate loading to bolster glycogen stores before
an athletic competition is considered sport nutrition, as is a tablet of
a single purified amino acid (not promoted for medicinal properties);
however, the tablet is considered a dietary supplement.
The FDA regulates both finished dietary supplement products and
dietary ingredients. Dietary supplements are regulated under a
different set of regulations than those covering conventional foods
and 
drugs 
(see 
FDA 
website 
at 
www.fda.gov/Food
/Dietarysupplements/default.htm). In 1994, the U.S. Congress
passed a seminal piece of legislation known as the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA). Under DSHEA,
manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements are prohibited
from marketing products that are adulterated or misbranded. This
means that these firms are responsible for evaluating the safety and
labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet
all the requirements of DSHEA and FDA regulations. Companies can,
however, make claims about effects on the body’s structure and
function as long as the manufacturers can show that the statements
are truthful and not misleading; this is a much less stringent
requirement than for effectiveness claims made for drugs.
Definition of Products That Can Be Sold as
Dietary Supplements
The following points define which products can be sold as dietary supplements in
the United States:
A product (other than tobacco) intended to supplement the diet that contains
one or more of the following dietary ingredients:
A vitamin
A mineral
An herb or other botanical
An amino acid
A dietary substance for use by humans to supplement the diet by
increasing the total dietary intake
663

A concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination of any
ingredient listed above
The product must also be labeled as a dietary supplement, such that the
label must include the term dietary supplement or equivalent and therefore
cannot also be advertised for use as a conventional food or as the sole item
within a meal or diet.
Ergogenic 
substances 
are 
usually 
banned 
from 
athletic
competition when a consensus is reached that they may provide an
unfair competitive edge or pose a significant health risk. This
prohibition does not need to be based on conclusive proof that a
substance does anything advantageous; it simply represents an
agreement among administrators or clinicians that this may be the
case. As mentioned previously, every sport’s governing body
publishes its own list of banned substances. Probably the most
widely recognized international organization regulating doping
worldwide is the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which oversees
the doping controls and establishes the banned substances list for
the International Olympic Committee (61). Each country has an
affiliated agency (e.g., United States Anti-Doping Agency [USADA],
United Kingdom Anti-Doping [UKAD], and Sport Integrity Australia
[SIA]) that oversees anti-doping controls for Olympic sports.
Additionally, in some countries these organizations also oversee
doping controls for professional sports (i.e., UKAD and SIA). The
prohibited substances list is standardized and updated by WADA
each year. While the WADA list is the international standard, other
organizations, such as collegiate and professional sports in the
United States, have different prohibited substances lists as well as
penalties for doping. Regardless of which organization regulates
doping controls, it is incumbent upon the athlete, sport coach,
strength and conditioning professional, and all support staff to
ensure that they are compliant with their respective organization’s
anti-doping policies. Figure 12.1 lists the National Collegiate Athletic
Association banned drug classes (updated in 2023). This list is used
by many universities in the United States and is subject to change
664

on a yearly basis. Check with your institution or governing body for
the list specific to your situation.
Some of the substances are illegal under governmental statute as
well. For example, in the United States anabolic steroids are a Class
III substance, which makes their possession, for other than medical
use, punishable with a maximum penalty of one year in prison and a
minimum US$1,000 fine if this is the individual’s first drug offense.
The maximum penalty for trafficking (to deal or trade in something
illegal) is no more than a 10-year prison sentence and a fine of no
more than US$500,000 if this is the individual’s first felony drug
offense. If this is the second felony drug offense, the maximum
period of imprisonment and the maximum fine both double. While
these penalties are for federal offenses, individual states have also
implemented fines and penalties for illegal use of anabolic steroids.
665

Hormones
A variety of endogenously produced hormones are used to enhance
athletic performance. The most commonly used hormone is
testosterone, 
along 
with 
its 
synthetic 
derivatives 
(115).
Testosterone is the primary androgen hormone that interacts with
skeletal muscle tissue. In addition to testosterone, a variety of other
hormones produced by the body have been employed by athletes as
ergogenic aids to stimulate the testes to produce testosterone, or
they have anabolic properties in themselves; growth hormone is an
example. Erythropoietin, which is secreted by the kidneys, is used to
stimulate red cell production for enhancement of aerobic endurance
performance, 
and 
catecholamines 
such 
as 
adrenaline 
(or
epinephrine), which have metabolic and nervous system effects, are
often used to enhance weight loss and to provide greater arousal for
performance.
Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids are the synthetic (human-made) derivatives of
the male sex hormone testosterone. Physiologically, elevations in
testosterone concentrations stimulate protein synthesis, resulting in
improvements in muscle size, body mass, and strength (25).
Additionally, 
testosterone 
and 
its 
synthetic 
derivatives 
are
responsible for the development and maturation of male secondary
sex characteristics (i.e., increase in body hair; masculine voice;
development of male pattern baldness, libido, sperm production, and
aggressiveness). These androgenic properties include the full
development of the primary sexual characteristics of the male. Thus
it is more accurate to refer to synthetic derivatives of testosterone as
anabolic-androgenic steroids. However, they are also referred to as
androgens, androgenic steroids, or anabolic steroids.
Figure 12.1 National Collegiate Athletic
666

Association banned drug classes.
A. Stimulants
Amphetamine (Adderall), Caffeine (Guarana), Cocaine, Dimethylbutylamine
(DMBA; AMP), Dimethylhexylamine (DMHA; Octodrine), Ephedrine, Heptaminol,
Hordenine, Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse), Methamphetamine, Methylhexanamine
(DMAA; Forthane), Methylphenidate (Ritalin), Mephedrone (bath salts), Modafinil,
Octopamine, Phenethylamine (PEAs) and its derivatives, Phentermine, Synephrine
(bitter orange).
Exceptions: Phenylephrine and Pseudoephedrine are not banned.
B. Anabolic Agents
Androstenedione, Boldenone, Clenbuterol, Clostebol, DHCMT (Oral Turinabol),
DHEA, 
Drostanolone, 
Epitrenbolone, 
Etiocholanolone, 
Methandienone,
Methasterone, Nandrolone (19-nortestosterone), Oxandrolone, SARMS [Ligandrol
(LGD-4033); Ostarine; RAD140; S-23], Stanozolol, Stenbolone, Testosterone,
Trenbolone.
C. Beta-Blockers (Banned for Rifle Only)
Atenolol, Metoprolol, Nadolol, Pindolol, Propranolol, Timolol.
D. Diuretics and Masking Agents
Bumetanide, 
Canrenone 
(Spironolactone), 
Chlorothiazide, 
Furosemide,
Hydrochlorothiazide, Probenecid, Triamterene, Trichlormethiazide.
Exceptions: Finasteride is not banned.
E. Narcotics
Buprenorphine, Dextromoramide, Diamorphine (heroin), Fentanyl and its
derivatives, Hydrocodone, Hydromorphone, Meperidine, Methadone, Morphine,
Nicomorphine, Oxycodone, Oxymorphone, Pentazocine, Tramadol.
F. Peptide Hormones, Growth Factors, Related
Substances, and Mimetics
Growth hormone (hGH), Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG), Erythropoietin
(EPO), IGF-1 (colostrum; deer antler velvet), Ibutamoren (MK-677).
Exceptions: Insulin, Synthroid and Forteo are not banned.
G. Hormone and Metabolic Modulators
Anti-Estrogen (Fulvestrant), Aromatase Inhibitors [Anastrozole (Arimidex); ATD
(androstatrienedione); Formestane; Letrozole], PPAR-d [GW1516 (Cardarine);
667

GW0742], 
SERMS 
[Clomiphene 
(Clomid); 
Raloxifene 
(Evista); 
Tamoxifen
(Nolvadex)].
H. Beta-2 Agonists
Albuterol, Formoterol, Higenamine, Salbutamol, Salmeterol, Vilanterol.
Note: The banned substance list on NCAA.org is updated annually; readers
should check the website for a recent update. Also, the list is not exhaustive
and only represents some of the banned substances within a particular drug
class. Any substance that is chemically/pharmacologically related to one of the
above drug classes, even if it is not listed as an example, is also banned.
Information about ingredients in medications and nutritional/dietary
supplements can be obtained by contacting AXIS at 816-474-7321 or
axis.drugfreesport.com.
There is no complete list of banned substances. Do not rely on this list to rule
out any label ingredient. Many nutritional/dietary supplements are contaminated
with banned substances not listed on the label. It is the student-athlete’s
responsibility to check with the appropriate athletics staff before using any
substance.
Reprinted by permission from National Collegiate Athletic Association, “2025-26
NCAA Banned Substances,” last modified June 2025, https://ncaaorg.s3
.amazonaws.com/ssi/substance/2025-26/2025-26NCAA_BannedSubstances.pdf.
Secretion of testosterone occurs primarily in the interstitial Leydig
cells in the testes. Although several other steroid hormones with
anabolic-androgenic properties are produced in the testes (e.g.,
dihydrotestosterone and androstenedione), testosterone is produced
in far greater quantities. Testosterone and these other male sex
hormones are also secreted in significantly smaller amounts from the
adrenal glands (in men and women) and ovaries (in women). Many
of the ergogenic aids on the market today are precursors for
testosterone (i.e., androstenedione) and are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.
Major Sport Organizations’ Lists of Banned
Substances
Major League Baseball
668

https://img.mlbstatic.com/mlb-images/image/upload/mlb
/oqj0ztqxefst9pmkpbcl.pdf
Major League Soccer
https://democrats-judiciary.house.gov/sites/democrats.judiciary.house.gov
/files/mlsconstitution_0.pdf
National Collegiate Athletic Association
https://ncaaorg.s3.amazonaws.com/ssi/substance/2024-25/2024-25NCAA
_BannedSubstances.pdf
National Football League
https://nflpaweb.blob.core.windows.net/website/PDFs/List-of-Prohibited-
Substances_PES_2022.pdf
National Hockey League
Consistent with World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) for both in-competition
and out-of-competition testing
USA Lacrosse
Consistent with WADA for both in-competition and out-of-competition testing
www.usalacrosse.com/sites/default/files/documents/Safety/2021-World-
Lacrosse-Anti-Doping-Code-Final.pdf
USA Powerlifting
Consistent with WADA for both in-competition and out-of-competition testing,
with the exception that USA Powerlifting does not enforce
www.usapowerlifting.com/usa-powerlifting-anti-doping-rules/
US Tennis Association
Consistent with WADA for both in-competition and out-of-competition testing
and the Tennis Anti-Doping Program
www.usta.com/en/home/about-usta/who-we-are/national/tennis-anti-doping-
-what-you-need-to-know.html#tab=tennisanti-dopingprogramme
World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
www.wada-ama.org/en/resources/world-anti-doping-code-and-international-
standards/prohibited-list
It was not until the 1930s that testosterone was isolated,
synthesized, and subsequently investigated for its effects in humans
(24). The physiological changes that testosterone regulates have
made it one of the drugs of choice for strength and power athletes
or other athletes interested in increasing muscle mass (115).
However, testosterone itself is a very poor ergogenic aid. Rapid
degradation occurs when testosterone is given either orally or
669

through injectable administration (24). Thus, chemical modification
of testosterone was necessary to slow the degradation process in
order to achieve androgenic and anabolic effects at lower
concentrations and to provide effective blood concentrations for
longer periods of time (24). Many derivatives of testosterone were
developed from 1940 to 1960 (186); once these modifications
occurred, anabolic steroid use through either oral or injectable
administration became possible. In recent years, anabolic steroid
administration via creams and gels for topical applications and skin
patches has increased in popularity, primarily for medical reasons.
However, the most commonly used forms for administration in
athletes are oral and injectable forms (115). Examples of oral and
injectable anabolic steroids are listed in table 12.1.
Dosing
Athletes typically use anabolic steroids in a stacking regimen, in
which they administer several different drugs simultaneously (167).
The rationale for stacking is to increase the potency of each drug via
an additive effect. That is, the potency of one anabolic agent may be
enhanced when it is consumed simultaneously with another anabolic
agent. Research in this area is limited, and the efficacy of stacking
has not been proven one way or the other. Individuals use both oral
and injectable compounds. Most users take anabolic steroids in a
cyclic pattern, meaning they use the drugs for several weeks or
months and alternate these cycles with periods of discontinued use
(167). Often users administer the drugs in a pyramid (step-up)
pattern in which dosages are steadily increased over several weeks
(115). Toward the end of the cycle, the athlete “steps down” to
reduce the likelihood of negative side effects. At this point, some
athletes discontinue the drug use or perhaps initiate another cycle of
different drugs (e.g., drugs that may increase endogenous
testosterone production, taken to prevent the undesirable drop in
testosterone concentrations that follows the removal of the
pharmaceutical agents). One study showed that the typical steroid
670

regimen involved an average of 3.1 agents, with a typical cycle
ranging from 5 to 10 weeks (167). The dose that the athlete
administered was reported to vary from between 5 and 29 times
greater than physiological replacement doses (167). These higher
pharmacologic dosages appear necessary to elicit the gains that the
athletes desire. In a classic study on the dose–response curve of
anabolic steroids, Forbes (68) demonstrated that the total dose of
anabolic steroids has a logarithmic relationship to increases in lean
body mass; low doses produce only slight effects, but there is a
progressive augmentation of lean body mass with increasingly larger
doses. These results reinforce the athlete’s philosophy that if a low
dose is effective, more must be better.
TABLE 12.1 Generic and Trade Names of Anabolic
Steroids Commonly Used by Athletes
Category and generic name
Example trade names
ORALLY ACTIVE STEROIDS
Danazol
Danocrine
Ethylestrenol
Maxibolin
Fluoxymesterone
Halotestin
Ultandren
Android-F
Mesterolone
Proviron
Mestranum
Methandrostenolone
Dianabol
Methyltestosterone
Metandren
Oreton methyl
Android
Testered
Virolin
Oxandrolone
Anavar
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
671

Category and generic name
Example trade names
Oxandrin
Oxymetholone
Anadrol-50
Stanozolol
Winstrol
INJECTABLE STEROIDS
Boldenone undecylenate
Equipoise
Parenabol
Dromostanolone
Drolban
Methenolone enanthate
Primobolan depot
Nandrolone esters*
Deca-durabolin
Durabolin
Dynabolan
Anabol
Testosterone esters*
Andriol
Delatestryl
Depo-testosterone
Oreton
Restandol
Sustanon
Trenbolone acetate
Finaject
Prabolan
TRANSDERMAL OR TOPICAL STEROIDS
Testosterone
Androderm
Androgen
Testim
Testoderm
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
Athletes typically use higher doses of the substances than are
prescribed for men with low testosterone levels. Methandrostenolone
(Dianabol), for example, maintains normal secondary sexual
characteristics in hypogonadal men at a replacement dose of
672

approximately 15 milligrams per day; athletes have reported using
up to 300 milligrams per day (77). This orally active drug has not
been available for medical use in the United States for several
decades but is still available through black market sources.
Testosterone enanthate is a testosterone ester and is an injectable
steroid that is readily available in the United States and is used
clinically for some rare diseases and for replacement treatment. A
replacement dose is approximately 75 to 100 milligrams per week
administered every one to two weeks. Injectable steroids are
administered intramuscularly, typically by deep gluteal injections.
They are also more potent than oral steroids because of their route
of delivery and perhaps also because they do not require additional
modification to protect them from immediate metabolism by the
liver. The injectable compounds have a wide range of half-lives.
Among the testosterone esters, testosterone propionate remains in
the circulation for approximately 1.5 days, whereas testosterone
buciclate lasts for three months after a single injection (18).
Who Uses Anabolic Steroids?
It is believed that athletes (particularly strength athletes) whose
goals are to improve athletic performance are the primary users of
anabolic steroids. George J. Mitchell, a former United States senator,
in the famous 2007 “Mitchell Report,” stated that use of androgenic-
anabolic steroids by Major League Baseball players in the United
States was pervasive (41). Before this revelation of anabolic steroid
use in athletes, earlier reports date back to the 1952 and 1956
Olympics, in which there were accounts of systematic use of
androgens by the Soviet weightlifting team (41). State-sponsored
anabolic steroid use in other countries has also been documented. In
the former German Democratic Republic after the fall of the
communist government in 1990, classified documents revealed a
secret state program beginning in 1966 to improve national athletic
performance using androgens (41, 75). In the United States,
widespread use has also been reported in powerlifters (51), National
673

Football League players (117), and collegiate athletes (146).
Additionally, a 2014 estimate indicated that between 2.9 and 4.0
million Americans have likely used anabolic steroids at some point in
their lifetime (173). Evidence also indicates that many steroid users
are secretive, with more than 50% of users indicating that they have
never disclosed their use of anabolic steroids to their physician
(176). Therefore, anabolic steroid use is still prevalent and an
important concern among recreational and athletic populations, with
some estimates suggesting roughly 100,000 new users per year
(24). Although results of several surveys suggest that anabolic
steroid use appears to have been declining over the last few decades
(213), anabolic steroids are among the top sport issues today
because of reported use in many sports over time (73).
Strength athletes are not the only users of anabolic steroids.
People outside organized sport use steroids to enhance appearance
rather than performance (56). National surveys of male American
high school seniors showed that approximately 7% were using, or
had used, anabolic steroids (12, 35). One-third of the admitted
steroid users were not involved in school-sponsored sports, and
more than one-fourth stated that their main reason for using
steroids was to improve appearance as opposed to athletic
performance. Pope and his colleagues (172, 174) described a subset
of bodybuilders with an altered self-image who believed that they
looked small and weak even though they were large and muscular.
These individuals used ergogenic substances and weight training to
increase their body size. Pope calls this condition “reverse anorexia
nervosa”; it is also known as muscle dysmorphia. These
bodybuilders appear to be substantially different from competitive
athletes in terms of their objectives, the substantial health risks that
some of them are willing to take, and their strategies of using
extremely large doses of anabolic steroids. This phenomenon may
suggest why the most serious illnesses associated with steroid use
have occurred almost exclusively in bodybuilders and not in other
steroid-using athletes (77).
674

Efficacy
The purported ergogenic benefits commonly attributed to anabolic
steroid use are increased muscle mass, strength, and athletic
performance, particularly in sports requiring maximal strength levels.
When anabolic steroids are taken at supraphysiologic doses, these
ergogenic benefits are realized (25). The degree and incidence of
these changes are variable, depending greatly on, among other
factors, the training status of the individual (25).
Muscle Mass and Strength
One of the primary reasons athletes and nonathletes take anabolic
steroids is to increase lean muscle mass and maximal strength. If
such improvements do occur, this will lead to better performance on
the field, with all other variables of athleticism held constant. When
anabolic steroids are given in doses similar to those used by
recreationally trained and competitive athletes, increases in muscle
protein synthesis are seen (98). These increases in protein synthesis
are likely responsible for the increases observed in lean body mass in
both recreationally trained and competitive athletes taking anabolic
steroids (107, 210). Even when anabolic steroids are administered to
normal adult men not engaged in intensive resistance training,
increases in body mass, including the nonfat component, are
observed (25, 69). The extent to which gains in lean body mass and
maximal strength occur with anabolic steroid use has been reported
in the scientific literature as a case study (3). In this study, an adult
male 
international-level 
bodybuilder 
self-injected 
androgenic
hormones (at a dosage of 53 mg/day) for a training period of one
year that included only a four-week abstinence from drugs in the
middle of the year. During this time, the bodybuilder was able to
gain about 7 kilograms (15 lb) of fat-free weight, increase the mean
fiber area of the vastus lateralis muscle by approximately 11% in six
months’ time, and significantly increase maximal strength. Despite
these improvements in muscle mass and strength, the individual’s
health status was negatively affected. Specifically, after drug
675

withdrawal, the subject experienced atrophic testicles and low
luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and testosterone
levels. 
High-density 
lipoprotein 
(HDL) 
cholesterol 
was 
also
significantly lowered, which indicates a higher risk for atherogenesis.
See more information on the health consequences of anabolic
steroid use in the Adverse Effects section.
For some time it was postulated that increases in body mass with
androgen use came from an increase in body water (107). An
increase in total body water is expected with an increase in muscle
mass, since water constitutes a majority of the cellular weight;
however, it has been postulated that anabolic steroids may increase
water retention as well by increasing interstitial and extracellular
volume. Although water retention may explain why not all of the
weight gain is sustained after cessation of anabolic steroid use, this
issue is still not well understood. In a study of experienced male
bodybuilders, an eight-week cycle of nandrolone decanoate (200
mg/week, intramuscularly) resulted in a significant 2.2-kilogram (4.9
lb) increase in body mass, a 2.6-kilogram (5.7 lb) increase in fat-free
mass, and a 0.4-kilogram (0.9 lb) decrease in fat mass, with no
change in hydration of fat-free mass (210). Additionally, the
extracellular and intracellular water ratio was unaltered. Even after
six weeks of discontinued androgen use, the body mass of the
bodybuilders was still significantly greater than baseline levels (1.6
kg [3.5 lb] greater), yet no hydration changes were seen. The
increase in fat-free mass and possible reduction in fat mass may last
for several months after cessation of use (69) (figure 12.2). Thus,
athletes may derive a benefit from steroid use even if they stop
taking the drugs long enough before competition to obtain a
negative drug test. This is why unannounced, year-round drug
testing of some elite athletes is important for the prevention of
unfair drug use.
676

FIGURE 12.2 Changes in lean body mass with anabolic steroid administration and
following drug cessation.
Data from Forbes et al. (1992).
Athletic Performance
Initially, researchers examining the ergogenicity of exogenously
administered anabolic steroids were unable to see any significant
performance effects (74, 201). Consequently, the scientific and
medical community suggested that anabolic steroids had little
influence on athletic performance. This, however, was contrary to
anecdotal reports emanating from gyms and training centers that
showed that athletes experienced large improvements in strength in
response to using anabolic steroids. On further examination of the
initial studies, several methodological flaws became apparent.
Several of these studies used physiological doses, in contrast to the
suprapharmacologic doses that are typically taken by athletes self-
administering androgens. In essence, these subjects were shutting
down their own endogenous production and replacing it with an
exogenous anabolic steroid. Another flaw in some of these
investigations was the method of strength assessment. In several
studies, strength performance was evaluated using a mode of
677

exercise that was different from the training stimulus. This lack of
specificity likely masked any possible training effect. Additionally,
several studies used subjects who had only minimal resistance
training experience (74, 201). When exogenous androgens have
been administered to experienced resistance-trained athletes,
significant strength gains have been consistently reported (4, 107).
Strength gains in experienced strength-trained athletes are generally
quite small relative to those seen in novice athletes, but when
strength-trained athletes use anabolic steroids, their strength gains
may be two to three times higher than those typically seen in
similarly trained athletes who are not supplementing (107, 210).
The purported ergogenic benefits commonly attributed
to anabolic steroid use are increased muscle mass,
strength, and athletic performance, but these changes
depend on the training status of the individual.
Psychological Effects
Anabolic steroid use is also associated with changes in aggression,
arousal, and irritability (152). The East Germans reportedly used
anabolic steroids for this effect, delivering high doses to the central
nervous system by taking steroids through the nose. The issue has
not been well studied, but anecdotal reports suggest that this
practice 
markedly 
increased 
aggressiveness 
and 
enhanced
performance among athletes (75). Elevations in arousal and self-
esteem may be a positive side effect for the anabolic steroid user.
Increases in aggressiveness may also be perceived as a benefit,
especially for athletes participating in contact sports.
Increased aggressiveness may not be confined to athletic
performance, however. Anabolic steroid users experiencing increased
aggressiveness may pose a threat both to themselves and to those
with whom they come in contact (163, 174). Anabolic steroids are
also associated with mood swings and psychotic episodes. Studies
have shown that nearly 60% of anabolic steroid users experience
678

increases in irritability and aggressiveness (174). Pope and
colleagues (175) reported significant elevations in aggressiveness
and manic scores following 12 weeks of testosterone cypionate
injections in a controlled double-blind crossover study. Interestingly,
the results of this study were not uniform across the subjects. Most
subjects showed little psychological effect, and few developed
prominent effects. A cause-and-effect relationship has yet to be
identified in anabolic steroid users, but it does appear that
individuals who experience psychological or behavioral changes
recover when steroid use is discontinued (79).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with anabolic steroid use are listed in
table 12.2. It is important to note that there are differences between
the side effects of anabolic steroid use under medical supervision
and those associated with abuse (i.e., consumption of many drugs at
high doses). Most of the information concerning adverse medical
events associated with anabolic steroid use has been acquired from
athletes self-administering the drugs. In conjunction, some of the
scientific literature has suggested that the medical problems related
to anabolic steroids may be somewhat overstated (23, 225),
considering that many of the side effects linked to abuse are
reversible 
on 
cessation. 
Anecdotally, 
it 
appears 
that 
a
disproportionate magnitude of use and incidence of adverse events
are evident in bodybuilders (who are also known for consuming
several other drugs—such as diuretics, thyroid hormones, insulin,
and anti-estrogens—that relieve some side effects but potentiate
other risk factors as well) compared to strength and power athletes.
Testosterone Precursors (Prohormones)
Prohormones are precursors to the synthesis of other hormones and
are theorized to increase the body’s ability to produce a given
specific hormone. The basis for the use of prohormones as an
ergogenic aid evolved from a study showing a threefold increase in
679

testosterone in healthy women who were given 100 milligrams of
either androstenedione or dehydroepiandrosterone (143). Athletes
who have continued to supplement with these testosterone
precursors 
(androstenedione, 
androstenediol, 
and
dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA]) likely do so on the premise that
they will increase testosterone concentrations, strength, muscle size,
and willingness to train, as well as providing overall athletic
performance enhancements similar to those experienced by people
taking anabolic steroids. However, these precursors have only
relatively 
weak 
androgenic 
properties 
in 
themselves;
androstenedione and DHEA have only 1/5th and 1/10th the
biological activity of testosterone, respectively (153). Nevertheless,
testosterone precursors were officially listed as controlled substances
in the 2004 Anabolic Steroid Control Act passed by the U.S.
Congress, which mandated a physician’s prescription for these
substances.
TABLE 12.2 Signs and Symptoms of Ergogenic Aid
Abuse
Affected system
Adverse effects
Cardiovascular
Lipid profile changes
Elevated blood pressure
Decreased myocardial function
Endocrine
Gynecomastia
Decreased sperm count
Testicular atrophy
Impotence and transient infertility
Genitourinary
Males
Decreased sperm count
Decreased testicular size
Females
Menstrual cycle irregularities
Clitoromegaly
Deepening of voice
Masculinization
680

Affected system
Adverse effects
Males and females
Gynecomastia
Libido changes
Dermatological
Acne
Male pattern baldness
Hepatic
Increased risk of liver tumors and liver damage
Musculoskeletal
Premature epiphyseal plate closure
Increased risk of tendon tears
Intramuscular abscess
Psychological
Mania
Depression
Aggression
Hostility
Mood swings
Designer Anabolic Steroid Control Act of
2014 (DASCA)
In the past few decades, the United States Congress enacted laws regulating
anabolic steroids. The first law was the Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 1990. This
was updated in 2004. Ten years later, this was updated again as the Designer
Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 2014 (DASCA). Noteworthy items about DASCA
include the following:
Congress felt that the laws before DASCA failed to sufficiently curtail the
misuse of anabolic steroids.
Through DASCA, Congress targeted those who would circumvent the Anabolic
Steroid Controlled Act of 2004 by manufacturing anabolic steroids with
slightly different chemical structures from those expressly controlled but that
are intended to cause the same potentially harmful effects.
DASCA amended the definition of “anabolic steroid” by adding 22 new
substances to the prior list.
Studies examining the efficacy of testosterone precursors have
produced varying results. No significant differences in strength or
body composition were seen in middle-aged men performing a
681

resistance training program while supplementing with either DHEA,
androstenedione (100 mg), or a placebo for three months (219).
When DHEA supplementation (150 mg) was examined in a group of
younger males (19-29 years) on a two-weeks-on, one-week-off cycle
for eight weeks, there were no gains in strength or lean tissue (33).
Additionally, the investigators were unable to see any changes in
serum testosterone, estrone, estradiol, or lipid concentrations with
supplementation. Even in studies using higher dosages (300 mg) of
androstenedione for eight weeks, in a similar two-weeks-on, one-
week-off protocol, no significant effect was observed in strength,
muscle size, or testosterone concentrations (33). However,
androstenedione supplementation did cause an increase in serum
concentrations of estradiol and estrone and was associated with
lower high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels. These results suggest
that although performance changes may not occur in athletes taking
this supplement, they may be at higher risk for some of the negative
side effects associated with anabolic steroid use. Broeder and
colleagues (30), in the conclusion to their Andro Project study in
which they investigated the physiological and hormonal influences of
androstenedione in conjunction with a high-intensity resistance
training program, made the following statement:
Testosterone precursors do not enhance adaptations to
resistance training when consumed in dosages recommended
by manufacturers. Testosterone precursor supplementation
does result in significant increases in estrogen-related
compounds, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate concentrations,
down-regulation in testosterone synthesis, and unfavorable
alterations in blood lipid and coronary heart disease risk
profiles of men aged 35 to 65 years. (p. 3093)
Based on the scientific evidence, it appears as if prohormones fall
far short of providing the anabolic effects generally associated with
androgens (32). However, scientific research has focused almost
exclusively on only a few prohormone supplements—DHEA,
682

androstenediol, 19-nor-androstenedione, and 19-nor-androstenediol.
There are many other prohormone supplements available that have
not been clinically tested. Also, use of prohormones has not been
studied in highly trained athletes. In addition, oral administration has
been the primary method of taking prohormones. The oral use of
prohormones may not be as effective as other means of intake (e.g.,
injection). All of this suggests that continued study of the efficacy of
the testosterone precursors for performance enhancement is still
needed; specifically warranted is examination of other routes of
ingestion in a trained competitive athletic population.
Selective Androgen Receptor Modulators
and Peptides
Selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs) are tissue-
selective agonists of androgen receptors in tissues such as muscle
and bone. As a result, SARMs are purported to have similar anabolic
properties as traditional anabolic steroids but with reduced
androgenic effects in other tissues where these effects are undesired
(e.g., liver or prostate). Therefore, there is also hope that SARMs
may produce more limited side effects when compared to anabolic
steroids. The development of novel peptides, or short chains of
amino acids that regulate cellular functions and biochemical
processes, has been an emerging frontier in pharmaceutical
development alongside SARMs and, similar to SARMs, has potential
for selective agonism and thus limited side effects. Due to their
significant clinical potential in diseases or disorders characterized by
muscle wasting, SARMs and various peptides have been and
continue to be tested in preclinical studies and in clinical trials in
various patient populations. However, there are no current FDA-
approved SARMs, and all are currently investigational drugs. All
SARMs are also currently prohibited both in and outside of
competition (i.e., at all times) for all athletes by WADA. Similarly,
hormone (e.g., testosterone, growth hormone, corticotrophin)-
stimulating peptides are prohibited at all times by WADA. Despite
683

this, SARMs and peptides are widely marketed to and used
recreationally by athletes and have also been found undisclosed in
dietary supplements (220). Table 12.3 lists SARMs that are popular
among recreational users. Athletes should be aware, however, that
products marketed and sold as SARMs or peptides may be just as
likely to contain a different drug or no SARMs or peptides at all.
Indeed, a chemical analysis of 44 products sold on the Internet as
SARMs indicated that only 52% of these actually contained a SARM,
59% contained substance amounts that were different from that
listed on the label, and 39% contained a different unapproved drug
altogether (212).
TABLE 12.3 Example Selective Androgen Receptor
Modulators (SARMs) Popular Among Recreational
Users
Research or developmental name
Trade name
MK 2866/GTx-024
Enobosarm
Ostarine
GTx-007
Andarine
LGD-4033
Ligandrol
RAD140
Testolone
S-23
—
YK-11
Myanabol
GSK2881078
—
Safety and Efficacy
Similar to anabolic steroids, the purported ergogenic benefits
attributed to SARMs include increased muscle mass, strength, and
performance. As alluded to previously, SARMs have primarily been
tested in the context of clinical trials in patient populations in whom
muscle wasting or muscle weakness are a major concern. However,
there is some limited available evidence regarding the safety and
684

efficacy of SARMs in healthy individuals in phase 1 trials. For
example, three weeks of LGD-4033 (e.g., ligandrol) use has been
shown to promote dose-dependent increases in lean body mass
among healthy young and middle-aged men (15). As is often
observed with oral androgen administration, these improvements in
lean body mass were observed alongside a dose-dependent
suppression of total testosterone, sex hormone–binding globulin
(SHBG), 
high-density 
lipoprotein 
cholesterol 
(HDL-C), 
and
triglycerides (15). Similarly, other SARMs such as GSK2881078 and
GTx-024 (enobosarm) have been shown to cause dose-dependent
increases in lean mass and decreases in HDL-C, SHBG, and total
testosterone, suggestive of significant androgen receptor agonism
(43, 157), as well as decreased triglycerides, very-low-density
lipoprotein, and apolipoprotein A1 (43). Most of these trials also
indicate that short-term SARM administration is well tolerated with
mild and infrequent adverse events relative to placebo but with
consistent decreases in HDL-C and increased alanine transaminase.
Thus, concern still exists related to hepatoxicity with SARM use, and
there have been reports of adverse SARM-induced cardiovascular
and hepatic outcomes with certain SARMs (101). For example, case
reports have associated acute myocarditis and liver injury with
RAD140 use by recreational athletes, which apparently resolved with
cessation of use (136, 162). Accordingly, the FDA issued a warning
to consumers that SARMs have been associated with serious or life-
threatening health problems that include increased risk of heart
attack or stroke, liver injury, sleep disturbances, sexual dysfunction,
and miscarriage.
Several of the peptides that have garnered interest in
bodybuilding communities, such as the growth hormone (GH)
secretagogue MK-677, showed preliminary efficacy for increasing
bone turnover and fat-free mass in older adults (156), but clinical
trials were terminated early due to significant safety signals such as
increased incidence of congestive heart failure (2). A case report
indicated that a five-week cycle of coadministered LGD-4033 and
685

MK-677 was associated with adverse effects on cholesterol,
testosterone, liver function markers, and bone mineral density in a
25-year-old resistance-trained male (37). Somapacitan, an FDA-
approved peptide for use in adults with GH deficiency, reduces trunk
fat and increases lean body mass in adults with GH deficiency (124).
However, it is notable that chronic (~20 weeks) administration of
peptides such as hexarelin have no effects on body composition
despite causing profound increases in GH release in healthy adults
(178). Other peptides, such as the GLP-1 receptor agonists
liraglutide and semaglutide, have demonstrated strong efficacy for
weight loss in individuals with overweight or obesity (169, 223), and
despite a lack of evidence for efficacy among individuals without
excess body fat, these weight loss effects may be intriguing to
recreational users for cosmetic reasons. Table 12.4 lists some
example peptide hormone classes that are explicitly named on the
WADA banned list.
Despite the promise of short-term safety and efficacy displayed by
several SARMs in initial clinical trials among healthy individuals,
substantial work is still necessary to understand the short- and long-
term risks associated with SARM and peptide use, understanding
that each SARM and peptide is structurally different and is therefore
likely to produce different primary and secondary (or side) effects.
Moreover, and as noted earlier, in many cases, SARMs available on
the market may include other potentially unsafe, nondisclosed
substances or may not contain the disclosed SARM at all (212);
therefore, risks of SARM or peptide use may be amplified among
recreational users. Figure 12.3 lists the short-term changes in lean
mass while consuming several different types of SARMs.
TABLE 12.4 Example Peptide Hormone Classes and
Specific Peptides Used by Recreational Users
Explicitly Named on the WADA Banned List
686

Testosterone stimulating
peptides
Chorionic gonadotropin, luteinizing hormone (LH),
gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH, gonadorelin)
and its agonist analogues (buserelin, deslorelin,
goserelin, leuprorelin, nafarelin, and triptorelin),
kisspeptin and its agonist analogues
Corticotrophin and
corticotrophin releasing
factors
Coricorelin and tetracosactide
Growth hormone (GH) and
its analogues
Lonapegsomatropin, somapacitan, somatrogon, AOD-
9604, and hGH 176-191
Growth hormone
secretagogues/releasing
peptides
GHRH, sermorelin, CJC-1293/1295, tesamorelin, MK-677,
lenomorelin (ghrelin), anamorelin, macimorelin,
tabimorelin, capromorelin, alexamorelin, examorelin
(hexarelin), GHRP-1–6
Growth factors and growth
factor modulators
IGF-1, mecasermin, FGFs, HGF, MGFs, PDGF, TB-500,
VEG-Fs, and any other growth factors or growth factor
modulators
Erythropoietins (EPO) and
agents affecting
erythropoiesis
Erythropoietin receptor agonists (dEPO), EPO, EPO-
based constructs (EPO-Fc, CERA), EPO-mimetic agents
and their constructs (CNTO-530, peginesatide); hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF) activating agents (cobalt,
daprodustat, IOX2, molidustat, roxadustate, vadadustat,
and xenon); GATA inhibitors; transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-β) signaling inhibitors (luspatercept,
sotatercept); innate repair receptor agonists (asialo EPO,
CEPO)
Data from World Anti-Doping Agency, “World Anti-Doping Code International Standard
Prohibited List 2025,” last modified September 12, 2024, https://www.wada-ama.org/sites
/default/files/2024-09/2025list_en_final_clean_12_september_2024.pdf.
687

FIGURE 12.3 Changes in total body lean mass in response to short-term LGD-4033
administration in healthy young men (squares), GSK2881078 administration in older men
and postmenopausal women (gender symbols), and GTx-024 in older men and women
(triangles). Changes in lean body mass generally demonstrated dose dependency, with
greater changes observed in response to higher doses.
Data from Basaria et al. (2013), Neil et al. (2018); Dalton et al. (2011).
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scientific studies have investigated the adverse
effects of selective androgen receptor modulators and peptides.
HCG (Human Chorionic Gonadotropin)
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) is a hormone obtained
from the placenta of pregnant women and is very closely related in
structure and function to luteinizing hormone. In fact, it is the
pregnancy indicator used by over-the-counter pregnancy test kits,
since it is generally not found in the body at any other time. In the
general population, HCG is sometimes injected into overweight
females under medical supervision in conjunction with low-calorie
diets for the purposes of weight loss (87). Research suggests that
when used for this purpose, HCG is not effective for inducing weight
loss. The caloric restriction that accompanies the HCG injections
appears to be the main contributing factor to associated weight loss
(87).
688

Efficacy
While HCG offers females no performance-enhancing ability, it is
cited anecdotally as useful for males who take anabolic steroids.
When injected into men, HCG can increase testicular testosterone
production; testosterone levels can nearly double within four days
after a large intramuscular injection (48). The activity of HCG in the
male body is due to its ability to mimic luteinizing hormone, a
pituitary hormone that stimulates the Leydig cells in the testicles to
manufacture testosterone. The reason males would want to be
injected with HCG to increase endogenous testosterone levels is that
endogenous testosterone production is suppressed at the end of a
steroid cycle (151, 154). For that reason, if HCG is used by athletes,
it is likely used by those who are finishing a cycle of anabolic
steroids and are looking to activate their own endogenous
testosterone production.
Adverse Effects
Human chorionic gonadotropin is given as an injection under the
skin or into a muscle; the side effects that are common to such
administration are pain, swelling, and tenderness around the
injection site. There is very little research on the side effects of HCG
injections. In one investigation in which HCG was injected into obese
women, no adverse effects were reported in relation to blood
pressure or routine blood work (197).
Insulin
Insulin is a potent anabolic hormone. It is secreted by the pancreas
in response to elevations in blood glucose or specific amino acid
(e.g., leucine) concentrations. Its role is to facilitate the uptake of
glucose and amino acids into the cell. Since insulin increases protein
synthesis, it is considered an anabolic hormone.
689

Efficacy
When 
insulin 
concentrations 
are 
elevated 
naturally 
(i.e.,
endogenously from the pancreas following carbohydrate ingestion),
there are no safety concerns in otherwise healthy individuals.
Additionally, it has been reported that postworkout carbohydrate
ingestion suppresses muscle protein breakdown via the anticatabolic
effects of insulin (29). Theoretically, if protein breakdown is
suppressed over several weeks to months, gains in lean muscle
mass could be realized.
Adverse Effects
Because of insulin’s anabolic properties and its rumored ability to
potentiate the effects of growth hormone and insulin-like growth
factors, some individuals (primarily bodybuilders) take insulin by
injection. The use of insulin in this manner comes with serious
consequences. Possible outcomes in a previously healthy athlete
include immediate death or coma due to severe hypoglycemia (106).
Human Growth Hormone
Human growth hormone (HGH), a protein secreted from the
anterior pituitary gland, has several important physiological functions
that enhance its ergogenic effect. It is anabolic due to its stimulation
of bone and skeletal muscle growth, but it also has important
metabolic functions such as maintaining blood glucose levels,
increasing the uptake of glucose and amino acids into muscle cells
(67), and stimulating release of fatty acids from the fat cells.
The primary source of pharmacologic growth hormone is a
relatively complicated molecule from which it is synthetically derived
using recombinant DNA technology. However, until 1986, the only
source of the hormone was the pituitaries of human cadavers.
Because HGH receptors are unable to cross-react with growth
hormone from animal sources, the financial cost of HGH was very
high before 1986. Although the use of cadaver growth hormone
came with significant health risks, these consequences did not
690

prevent athletes from taking the supplement but instead only
substantially restricted use (115). The development of recombinant
HGH provided clinicians with a relatively low-risk drug at a lower cost
(as compared to cadaver growth hormone) with greater availability.
Clinicians can now prescribe recombinant HGH to increase stature in
short children with growth hormone deficiency and alter body
composition in adults. The use of HGH as a performance-enhancing
substance is believed to be widespread among professional athletes;
it is either taken alone or stacked with anabolic steroids (16). Even
though recombinant technology has increased the availability of
HGH, its cost, especially on the black market, is extremely high—
between several hundred and a few thousand dollars per month.
Humatrope, Nutropin, Norditropin, Genotropin, Omnitrope, Serostim,
Saizen, and Protropin are brand names of HGH commonly used in
the United States.
Efficacy
There appear to be no studies on the efficacy of HGH in professional
athletes. Most investigations of HGH have focused on HGH as
replacement therapy in growth hormone–deficient adults and
children or in healthy older individuals. These studies have
consistently shown positive alterations in body composition
(increases in lean body tissue with decreases in body fat) (66, 204).
In men with established growth hormone deficiencies, nightly
injections of recombinant HGH for six months resulted in an average
increase of 12 pounds (5.4 kg) in lean body mass and a similar
amount of fat loss (184). Most studies have not addressed the effect
of HGH therapy on muscle strength and performance. One study
showed no changes in isokinetic strength following 12 months of
therapy (112). However, the subjects in that study did not perform
any resistance training during the course of treatment. A study
involving trained adults given growth hormone (three days per week
for six weeks) showed modest changes in body composition, but no
strength assessment was performed (50). Although the scientific
691

literature does not provide support for the efficacy of HGH use in
athletic populations, it is likely that the inability to perform such
studies (due to ethical constraints) will limit much of our
understanding of HGH and human performance. In years past, the
use of HGH by athletes may have been prevalent in some
professional sports because of its perceived efficacy and the fact that
it could not be detected in random drug tests. Currently, HGH
cannot be detected in the urine via a drug test, and it may be
postulated that athletes opt to use it for this reason. However, a
blood test for HGH was first introduced at the 2004 Summer Olympic
Games in Athens, Greece.
Growth hormone is a protein molecule. Injection is necessary in
order to avoid its complete metabolism and maintain its
effectiveness. Oral ingestion does not result in any benefit. Many of
the actions of growth hormone are mediated through insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), another peptide hormone, which is
produced and secreted from the liver in response to growth hormone
stimulation. IGF-1 is now being synthesized using recombinant DNA
technology and will likely produce the same effects as HGH.
Adverse Effects
The use of HGH does, however, present some potential significant
health risks. Excessive secretion of growth hormone during
childhood causes gigantism, a condition in which a person becomes
abnormally tall. After puberty, once linear growth has stopped,
excess secretion of growth hormone causes acromegaly, a
disfiguring disease characterized by a widening of the bones,
arthritis, organ enlargement, and metabolic abnormalities. This is a
potential risk for athletes who use HGH as an ergogenic aid.
Additionally, these side effects may provide some indication that the
athlete could be using this drug. In clinical studies in growth
hormone–deficient adults, side effects appear to be minimal for even
up to two years of replacement therapy (1, 209). However, athletes
who supplement with HGH generally use dosages that far exceed the
692

doses commonly administered in replacement treatment (16). Thus,
one should not assume that HGH use is benign with regard to
adverse medical events in doses commonly used by an athletic
population. Adverse side effects for HGH abuse are diabetes in prone
individuals; cardiovascular dysfunction; muscle, joint, and bone pain;
hypertension; abnormal growth of organs; and accelerated
osteoarthritis (16).
Although growth hormone used as replacement therapy
for people with growth hormone or IGF-1 deficiency can
be 
effective 
and 
can 
have 
minimal 
adverse
consequences, the dosages that are likely used by
athletes may pose a significant risk for acromegaly.
Erythropoietin
One of the limiting factors for endurance performance is the athlete’s
ability to deliver oxygen to the contracting skeletal muscle. Over the
years, several methods have been developed to increase the body’s
ability to deliver oxygen. Some methods include novel training
programs that may naturally elevate red blood cell and hemoglobin
levels (i.e., living and training at altitude), while other methods
involve synthetic means to elevate the oxygen-carrying capacity of
the blood (i.e., blood doping). Blood doping increases one’s red
blood cell mass and is typically conducted using blood transfusions
or taking a hormone known as erythropoietin. There are two forms
of blood doping via blood transfusions: autologous and homologous.
Autologous blood doping is the transfusion of one’s own blood,
which has been stored (refrigerated or frozen) until needed.
Homologous blood doping is the transfusion of blood that has been
taken from another person with the same blood type. Since the late
1980s, blood doping via autologous blood transfusion has taken a
back seat to the more popular method, administration of
recombinant human erythropoietin (39).
693

Erythropoietin (EPO) is produced in the kidneys and stimulates
the production of new red blood cells. It is also a protein hormone
that can be produced by recombinant DNA techniques and is
reportedly being abused by athletes (64). Erythropoietin use was
one of the methods of doping that Lance Armstrong admitted to
over the course of his cycling career. The EPO level in the blood
increases in response to chronic aerobic endurance exercise. In
certain types of anemia, especially in kidney patients with
inadequate EPO production, recombinant human EPO can improve
the quality of life of the individual.
Efficacy
Injections of EPO are generally associated with elevations in both
hematocrit and hemoglobin. A 2013 systematic review and meta-
analysis indicated that EPO administration promotes increases in
hemoglobin and hematocrit of 5% to 17% and 8% to 19%,
respectively (108). These increases are accompanied by increases in
aerobic capacity and maximal power output of 7% to 10%, which
are in turn linked with improvements in time to exhaustion in open
endpoint exercise for both trained (9%-17%) and untrained
(22%-50%) individuals (108). Therefore, the ability of EPO to
enhance oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood suggests it is likely to
be an effective ergogenic aid for the aerobic endurance athlete.
Initial evidence also indicates that 16 days of EPO administration can
elicit changes in the skeletal muscle proteome in a manner that
supports aerobic exercise performance (e.g., increased oxidative
enzyme activity) (42). However, it is also important to note that the
effect of EPO administration on time trial performance or other
parameters critical toward aerobic exercise performance such as the
ventilatory threshold, critical velocity, or critical power is not well
understood. While much of the research conducted with EPO is
focused on endurance performance, there is theoretical rationale for
EPO use by anaerobic athletes to improve recovery from high-
intensity efforts.
694

Adverse Effects
While medically supervised use of EPO provides therapeutic benefit
in the treatment of anemia related to kidney disease, its misuse can
lead to serious health risks for athletes who use this substance
simply to gain a competitive edge. The increase in hematocrit
resulting from EPO injection presents a significant health risk.
Increases in red blood cell number increase blood viscosity (the
thickening of the blood). This poses several problems that include
increased risk of blood clotting, elevations in systolic blood pressure
and accentuation of the exercise pressor response stroke, and
cerebral or pulmonary embolism (22, 42, 82). During aerobic
endurance events, the additional problem of dehydration could
compound cardiovascular risks by eliminating any safety margin in
the balance between performance advantages from artificially
increased hematocrit and decrements from increased blood viscosity.
Several studies have noted marked accentuation of the blood
pressure response during exercise following EPO administration. The
deaths of a number of competitive cyclists have been related to EPO
administration (82). The primary risk associated with EPO is its lack
of predictability compared to red blood cell infusion. Once EPO is
injected into the body, the stimulus for producing red blood cells is
no longer under control. Consequently, aerobic endurance athletes
should avoid this drug because of the significant cardiovascular risk,
leading to possible death, associated with its administration.
β-Adrenergic Agonists
Synthetic β-adrenergic agonists, or β-agonists, are substances
chemically related to epinephrine, a hormone produced in the
adrenal medulla that regulates physiological effects, such as
lipolysis (the breakdown of fat) and thermogenesis (increased
energy expenditure resulting in the production of heat). β-Agonists
were originally developed for the treatment of asthma and other life-
threatening medical conditions. Some of these compounds have
been found to have specific effects on body composition, such as
695

increases in lean mass and decreases in stored fat (177); because of
this, these drugs are sometimes referred to as partitioning agents.
One of the more popular β-agonists used by athletes is the drug
clenbuterol (177).
Efficacy
Clenbuterol is a β2-agonist and is a widely used bronchodilator (used
to reverse bronchial restriction) in many parts of the world. Athletes
use clenbuterol as an ergogenic aid to increase lean muscle tissue
and reduce subcutaneous fat (177). Data on the effectiveness of
clenbuterol have typically been based not on healthy athletes, but
rather subjects with heart failure (125) and patients experiencing
muscle-wasting conditions (144). Though studies in humans are
limited, several findings have indicated an ergogenic potential of β2-
agonists for strength improvements (145). Athletes generally use
clenbuterol in doses twice the recommended amounts administered
for clinical purposes, in a cyclic fashion (three weeks on alternated
with three weeks off, with a two-days-on, two-days-off cycle during
the “on” week) (177).
Adverse Effects
Athletes consume clenbuterol in a capsule form, in contrast to the
inhalation route that is often used for relieving bronchial constriction.
Although a number of potential side effects have been suggested
(i.e., transient tachycardia, hyperthermia, tremors, dizziness,
palpitations, and insomnia), actual documented events are quite
limited (196). In addition, the scarcity of data on the ergogenic
potential of clenbuterol in humans makes determining its efficacy
difficult.
β-Blockers
β-Blockers are a class of drugs that block the β-adrenergic
receptors, preventing the catecholamines (i.e., norepinephrine and
epinephrine) from binding. β-Blockers are generally prescribed by
696

cardiologists for the treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular
diseases, including hypertension. The ergogenic benefit of these
drugs may reside in their ability to reduce anxiety and tremors
during performance (138). Thus, athletes who rely on steady,
controlled movements during performance (i.e., archers or
marksmen) would appear to benefit from these drugs. Also, β-
blockers may improve physiological adaptations from aerobic
endurance training by causing an upregulation of β-receptors. If this
is true, it would result in an exaggerated response to sympathetic
discharge during intense exercise on cessation of supplementation.
Efficacy
Several studies have shown that β-blockers can improve both slow
and fast shooting accuracy (7, 135). In addition, the dose taken
appears to have significant effects on the magnitude of
improvement. In shooters who administered β-blockers in two
different doses (80 mg vs. 40 mg of oxprenolol), the group taking
the higher dose shot with greater accuracy (7). In certain sports,
however, some degree of anxiety may be important. Tesch (205)
reported that bowlers whose performance was improved during
blockade with oxprenolol had significantly greater heart rates before,
during, and after competition than subjects whose performance did
not improve while on β-blockers.
Impact of Alcohol on Performance
Both acute and chronic alcohol consumption can impede exercise performance by
adversely affecting several physiological processes critical toward optimizing
performance and recovery. Perhaps most obviously, acute alcohol consumption can
impair performance in skilled tasks by effects on fine motor control, reaction time,
judgment, and arousal (191). However, acute alcohol consumption has also been
shown to impede skeletal muscle metabolism, recovery, and adaptation. For
example, isometric and dynamic strength loss induced by strenuous eccentric
exercise is exacerbated by high-dose postexercise alcohol consumption (~6.3
standard drinks over 1.5 hours, where a standard drink contains 14 g of pure
alcohol) in young men (14), although strength trained women may be protected
from this effect (137). Similarly, mechanistic studies suggest that acute high-dose
697

(~4–8.5 standard drinks) alcohol ingestion after strenuous resistance or high-
intensity interval training impedes exercise-induced phosphorylation of the
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway and reduces rates
of muscle protein synthesis, an effect that also appears to be most prominent in
men (60, 165). Alcohol also has known diuretic effects, causing an increase in
excess urine production of about 10 milliliters for every gram of ethanol ingested
(63). Therefore, hydration-related effects are most significant when concentrated
alcohol solutions are consumed, and consumption of dilute alcohol solutions or
alcohol with adequate additional fluid intake can offset the diuretic effect (191). In
addition, large alcohol doses can dramatically affect thermoregulatory ability,
augmenting environmental heat loss at low ambient temperatures (88, 89).
Finally, alcohol can impair exercise performance and recovery via effects on
sleep and autonomic function. For example, evening binge alcohol consumption (4-
5 standard drinks within 2 hours) disrupts sleeping cardiac vagal tone and reduces
sleep quality (53, 93), and increases sympathoexcitation and disrupts blood
pressure regulation the following morning (94). These disruptions may serve to
increase cardiovascular strain and impair performance during subsequent exercise,
although this has not been directly tested. It is important to note that many of
these effects are likely dependent on the amount of alcohol consumed, and studies
to tease out dose-dependent effects (particularly at high doses) are difficult both
logistically and ethically.
Evidence also shows that chronic alcohol consumption can impair muscle
metabolism and impede training-induced adaptations. Skeletal muscle from middle-
aged men and women with chronic alcohol abuse displays increased catabolic
markers (e.g., MurF-1, ubiquinated proteins), decreased anabolic markers (e.g.,
phosphorylated 4E-BP1), and decreased insulin receptor substrate 1, which plays a
critical role in transmitting signals from insulin and IGF-1 to coordinate cellular
growth and metabolism (189, 190). Therefore, chronic alcohol consumption can
impede training-related adaptations and promote signatures consistent with
myopathy in muscle, but the degree to which these effects occur are likely directly
related to the degree of alcohol use (or abuse).
Adverse Effects
β-Blockers may also have an ergolytic effect (reduce performance).
Studies have shown that β-blockers impair the cardiovascular
response to exercise by reducing maximal heart rate, oxygen
consumption, and 10-kilometer (6.2 miles) race time performance
(6). Also, β-blockers are associated with an increased rating of
perceived exertion (205). Risks associated with these drugs include
bronchospasm, heart failure, prolonged hypoglycemia, bradycardia,
heart block, and intermittent claudication (78).
698

Dietary Supplements
The global market for sports nutrition products continues to grow at
a significant pace, with an estimated market value of over US$53.6
billion (208). Some sports nutrition companies make unsubstantiated
claims concerning the efficacy of their products. At times,
unscrupulous companies have knowingly placed analogs of banned
substances in their products to enhance their effects (44). As a
result, much confusion has been created among athletes regarding
appropriate supplements and the ethics of companies. This section
describes dietary supplements that are commonly used by athletes
and presents scientific examination of their efficacy.
Essential Amino Acids, Branched-Chain
Amino Acids
Essential amino acids (EAAs) are not produced in the body and
must be obtained through the diet. They include histidine,
isoleucine, leucine, valine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine,
threonine, and tryptophan. High levels of EAAs can be found in any
number of animal-based proteins or as supplements sold over the
counter. Leucine can also be found in plants such as spinach and
broccoli, but the amount of leucine is minimal when compared to
that in animal-based sources.
Efficacy
Scientists have been able to delineate certain categories of amino
acids as well as individual amino acids and their role in stimulating
muscle protein synthesis. For example, Tipton and colleagues (206)
reported that nonessential amino acids were not necessary to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis; rather, only the presence of EAAs
is needed. In this research (206), six healthy adults, three males and
three females, participated in resistance exercise (8 sets of 8
repetitions at 80% 1RM) and then consumed either 40 grams of
mixed amino acids (composed of both nonessential and essential
699

amino acids), 40 grams of EAA, or a placebo. While the mixed amino
acids and the EAA induced an anabolic response that was
significantly greater than with the placebo treatment, no difference
was observed between the amino acid treatments. Since there was
no difference, it was concluded that nonessential amino acids are
not needed to stimulate muscle protein synthesis. In a follow-up
study, using the same protocol (but with only 6 g EAA and 35 g
sugar), Rasmussen and colleagues (180) demonstrated significantly
greater anabolic drive—that is, the building of new muscle tissue—
with the EAA supplement (when given shortly after resistance
exercise) versus the placebo.
Subsequently, Tipton and colleagues (207) examined the effects
of consuming 6 grams EAA plus 36 grams of sugar, before or after
resistance training, on muscle protein metabolism. They reported
that when the EAA plus sugar was consumed 30 minutes before
resistance training, the acute (3 hr after exercise) anabolic response
was 158% greater than when the EAA and sugar supplement were
consumed after training. As a result of these acute findings, Tipton
and colleagues (207) and Rasmussen and colleagues (180) theorized
that a person who consumed EAA before or after (or both before
and after) every resistance training session over a period of weeks
would experience greater changes in muscle mass than with training
only. It is important to note that although the nonessential amino
acids are not required to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, this
does not mean that they are not important for maximizing training
adaptations in the athlete. The conditionally essential and
nonessential amino acids serve as the substrates that are
incorporated into the newly formed muscle proteins; further, they
also spare the conversion of these amino acids from the essential
ones, thus effectively increasing the levels of EAAs.
Prior work in animal models further identified that of the eight
EAAs, it is the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs)—isoleucine,
leucine, and valine—that are responsible for increasing muscle
protein synthesis (83). Of the BCAAs, it appears that leucine is the
700

key amino acid for stimulating muscle protein synthesis (126) via the
Akt/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway (figure 12.4).
Norton and coworkers (159) demonstrated in rodent models that a
leucine threshold for stimulating muscle protein synthesis exists.
Based on this pioneering research, many nutrition researchers now
believe that the leucine content in any given protein intake is the
rate-limiting factor in terms of maximizing muscle protein synthesis
within the capacity of skeletal muscle rather than simply the total
amount of protein ingested. To support this theory of the importance
of the content of a protein meal, Pasiakos and colleagues (166)
reported that a leucine-enriched EAA beverage resulted in a
significant elevation of muscle protein synthesis compared to a
normal leucine-containing EAA beverage. In this study, trained males
ingested one of two different 10-gram EAA beverages during cycling
exercise—one containing 3.5 grams of leucine (46 mg/kg body
mass) and the other containing 1.87 grams of leucine (~25 mg/kg
body mass). After the exercise bout (during a 3-hr assessment
period), muscle protein synthesis was 33% greater in the leucine-
enriched EAA beverage. The importance of leucine intake and its role
in the anabolic response of skeletal muscle following resistance
training continues to be a popular topic in sports nutrition research
today.
FIGURE 12.4 Role of leucine in muscle protein synthesis.
701

The branched-chain amino acid leucine is a key
regulator in stimulating muscle protein synthesis.
Leucine directly activates the Akt/mTOR pathway in
skeletal muscle, which is a key pathway in skeletal
muscle protein synthesis.
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scientific studies have investigated the adverse
effects of branched-chain amino acid or EAA supplementation.
Arginine
Arginine is a conditionally essential amino acid and has crucial roles
in nutrition and metabolism. Arginine is required for the synthesis of
protein and creatine, and its metabolism results in the production of
nitric oxide. The claims often attributed to arginine supplementation
are its ability to elevate nitric oxide levels, increase muscle blood
flow, and improve exercise performance. Each of these claims is
directed at athletes or physically active individuals, because these
are all outcomes that would be beneficial for enhancing sport
performance or maximizing training adaptations. Unfortunately,
there is very little scientific evidence supporting these claims
regarding arginine supplementation in the populations that these
outcomes would benefit.
Efficacy
Oral arginine supplementation is most often marketed for its
potential to elevate nitric oxide levels. Nitric oxide possesses many
physiological roles in the human body, but its effects on
vasodilation (i.e., the widening of blood vessels) are what make it
important during exercising conditions. During exercise, nitric oxide
levels are naturally increased so that more blood can flow through
the arteries and arterioles for the purpose of delivering oxygen and
fuel substrates to the working skeletal muscles (27). While nitric
oxide is essential for vasodilation, the overwhelming majority of the
702

scientific literature does not support the claim that oral arginine
supplementation increases nitric oxide production to levels that are
greater than the effects of exercise alone in healthy individuals (5,
142).
A natural outcome of nitric oxide production is increased muscle
blood flow. Therefore, increasing muscle blood flow is also a popular
claim that is made regarding arginine’s effectiveness. Despite the
common perception among athletes and consumers of dietary
supplements that arginine supplementation does increase muscle
blood flow, investigations into this area are in agreement that
muscle blood flow is not increased in healthy individuals following
arginine supplementation (203). Oral arginine supplementation has
also been purported to improve endurance exercise performance.
However, in research investigating arginine’s effectiveness in healthy
populations, it was reported that time to exhaustion, local muscular
endurance, and intermittent anaerobic exercise performance were
not improved as a result of supplementation (95, 142, 214). Due to
its inability to increase nitric oxide production, enhance muscle blood
flow, or improve several modes of endurance exercise, oral arginine
supplementation is not recommended for healthy athletes.
Adverse Effects
A majority of the scientific investigations in which arginine was given
to participants to improve exercise performance used a 6-gram dose.
While this dose of arginine was not effective in improving endurance
performance, this amount was well tolerated and posed no adverse
side effects. Oral supplementation at doses up to 13 grams is
generally well tolerated. The most common adverse reactions to
higher doses (13-30 g) include gastrointestinal distress consistent
with nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea (45).
Due to its inability to increase nitric oxide production,
enhance muscle blood flow, or improve endurance
703

exercise performance, oral arginine supplementation is
not recommended for healthy athletes.
β-Hydroxy-β-Methylbutyrate
β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) is a derivative of the EAA
leucine and its metabolite α-ketoisocaproic acid. Evidence shows that
HMB plays a role in the regulation of muscle protein breakdown in
the body (decreases protein breakdown) by inhibiting the ubiquitin–
proteasome pathway (193). Due to HMB’s role in the regulation of
protein breakdown, it may be an effective supplement for minimizing
losses of lean muscle mass in situations that promote a catabolic
state. β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate is not currently banned or
restricted by sport organizations.
Efficacy
The initial research study that highlighted HMB’s anticatabolic
potential was conducted by Nissen and colleagues (158). In this
study, untrained subjects ingested one of three levels of HMB (0,
1.5, or 3.0 g per day) and two protein levels (117 or 175 g per day)
and resistance trained three days per week for three weeks. As a
measure of myofibrillar protein breakdown, urinary 3-methyl-
histidine levels were measured (higher levels of urinary 3-methyl-
histidine mean that more muscle protein is catabolized, or broken
down). After the first week of the resistance training protocol,
urinary 3-methyl-histidine was increased by 94% in the control
group and by 85% and 50% in those individuals ingesting 1.5 and 3
grams of HMB per day, respectively. During the second week of the
study, urinary 3-methyl-histidine levels were still elevated by 27% in
the control group but were 4% and 15% below basal levels for the
1.5 and 3 grams of HMB per day groups. At the end of the third
week of resistance training, urinary 3-methyl-histidine levels were
not significantly different between the groups (158).
Research in other catabolic-inducing environments has also
demonstrated the effectiveness of HMB supplementation. For
704

example, when older adults were confined to complete bed rest (a
catabolic state) for 10 days, it was reported that the subjects who
were supplemented with 3 grams of HMB per day lost significantly
less lean body mass (lost only 0.37 lb [0.17 kg]) as compared to
those subjects who were supplemented with a placebo (lost 4.5 lb
[2.04 kg]) (55). Other research findings are in agreement with these
observations and have shown that HMB exerts an anticatabolic effect
and suppresses muscle damage (130).
In previously untrained individuals initiating a resistance training
program lasting four to eight weeks, HMB has been shown to exert
significantly greater improvements in strength and lean body mass
as compared to a placebo (158, 164). The muscle damage and
soreness that result from resistance training are predictably greater
in those who have little training experience as compared to
individuals who have engaged in resistance training for longer
periods of time. Given HMB’s ability to suppress muscle damage and
muscle protein breakdown, it is not surprising that HMB is effective
for people beginning a new training program.
The ergogenic effects of HMB in trained individuals are less
conclusive. Studies using resistance-trained or competitive athletes
were unable to duplicate the results seen in a recreationally trained
population using similar supplementation schedules (160, 179).
However, many of the studies investigating the effects of HMB on
strength and lean body mass in trained individuals were of short
duration (less than five weeks) and lacked the presence of a
periodized, high-intensity training program. In order for HMB to be
effective, it may be essential to provide novel stimuli to individuals to
induce either muscle damage or stimulate elevated protein
breakdown. It appears that trained individuals instructed not to
change their programs do not benefit from HMB. Investigations that
have provided an adequate training stimulus in trained individuals
have also reported increases in maximal strength and lean body
mass as compared to placebo treatments (158, 164).
705

Adverse Effects
The duration, dosage, and timing of HMB supplementation have
notably varied in the scientific literature. In nearly every published
investigation related to HMB supplementation, 3 to 6 grams per day
was ingested. Three grams per day (often divided into several
doses) is the most common dosage used in published studies. The
majority of studies investigating HMB have used the calcium salt of
HMB—HMB-Ca. Another form of HMB, HMB-free acid, has been
investigated as well (192). The safety of HMB supplementation has
been widely studied, and currently, the consensus is that HMB
presents no known adverse effects.
β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate is most effective when an
adequate training stimulus is provided. For untrained
individuals, this does not likely require high-volume
training. For trained individuals, a high-intensity, high-
volume resistance training program is likely needed for
benefits to be realized with HMB supplementation.
Nutritional Muscle Buffers
During high-intensity anaerobic exercise, a significant accumulation
of hydrogen ions (H+) is coupled with a reduction of pH within
skeletal muscle and has been shown to adversely affect performance
(182). The ability to regulate H+ concentration in skeletal muscle
during high-intensity exercise has been termed muscle buffering
capacity (MBC). There is a strong positive relationship between
MBC and exercise performance (repeated-sprint ability, high-intensity
exercise capacity, anaerobic threshold, and training volume) (62). In
fact, researchers have demonstrated a positive relationship between
exercise performance and MBC in athletes who participate in sports
such as basketball, soccer, hockey, cycling, crew (rowing), triathlons,
and sprinting (62). In theory, improving MBC by training or
nutritional means (β-alanine, sodium bicarbonate, or citrate) would
706

improve performance in sports and activities that may be limited by
H+ buildup. Therefore, a brief review of β-alanine, sodium
bicarbonate, and sodium citrate and their effects on high-intensity
exercise performance follows.
β-Alanine
β-Alanine is a nonessential amino acid that is common in many foods
that we eat, such as chicken. By itself, β-alanine has limited
ergogenic properties. However, in muscle cells, it is the rate-limiting
substrate for carnosine synthesis (59). Harris and colleagues (104)
reported that four weeks of supplementing with β-alanine (4-6
g/day) resulted in a mean increase of 64% in skeletal muscle β-
alanine concentrations. In humans, carnosine is found primarily in
fast-twitch (type II) skeletal muscle and is estimated to contribute
up to 40% of the skeletal MBC of H+ produced during intense
anaerobic exercise, thus encouraging a drop in pH (104, 109).
Theoretically, increasing skeletal muscle carnosine levels through
chronic training or β-alanine supplementation (or both) would
improve MBC and most likely improve anaerobic performance.
Interestingly, carnosine concentrations in athletes such as sprinters
and bodybuilders appear to be significantly higher than those in
marathoners, untrained individuals, and older people (104, 202).
Suzuki and colleagues (202) examined the relationship between
skeletal muscle carnosine levels and high-intensity exercise
performance in trained cyclists. The authors reported a significant
and positive relationship between carnosine concentration and mean
power in a 30-second maximal sprint on a cycle ergometer. This
finding supported the theory that skeletal muscle carnosine levels
have a positive correlation with anaerobic performance because of
the relationship between carnosine and MBC.
Efficacy
β-Alanine has been studied for its effects on strength, aerobic power,
and high-intensity short-term exercises interspersed with short
recovery intervals. In contrast to creatine, β-alanine does not seem
707

to improve maximal strength (127). Similarly, aerobic power does
not appear to be improved with β-alanine supplementation (127).
Even though aerobic power is not improved, supporting data indicate
that anaerobic threshold is improved with β-alanine supplementation
(226). Practically, improving anaerobic threshold (as measured by
the lactate and ventilatory thresholds) means that endurance
activities can be performed at relatively higher intensities for longer
periods. Hill and colleagues (109) examined the effect of β-alanine
supplementation 
on 
muscle 
carnosine 
levels 
and 
exercise
performance in untrained subjects. In a double-blind fashion, 25
male subjects (19-31 yr) supplemented with either 4.0 grams β-
alanine or sugar placebo for the first week, then with up to 6.4
grams for an additional nine weeks. Muscle carnosine levels (via
muscle biopsy) and total work done (kilojoules) were measured at
weeks 0, 4, and 10 during cycling to exhaustion at maximal power
established from a graded exercise cycle ergometry test. Mean
carnosine levels increased by 58% at week 4 and an additional 15%
at week 10. Additionally, 13% and 16% increases in total work done
during cycle ergometry were seen at weeks 4 and 10, respectively.
In a comprehensive review summarizing the effects of β-alanine
supplementation 
on 
high-intensity 
performance, 
Artioli 
and
colleagues (9) stated that β-alanine ingestion is capable of improving
performance in exercises resulting in an extreme intramuscular
acidotic environment, such as multiple bouts of high-intensity
exercises lasting more than 60 seconds, as well as single bouts
undertaken when fatigue is already present. High-intensity exercises
performed with a lower level of acidosis are unlikely to benefit from
β-alanine supplementation.
Adverse Effects
In the published literature, β-alanine ingestion has ranged from 2.4
to 6.4 grams per day. In many β-alanine trials, the total daily
amount of β-alanine ingestion was divided into two to four smaller
doses. The reason for the smaller dosing strategies is to prevent the
only reported adverse effect of β-alanine supplementation, which is
708

the symptom of paresthesia (tingling, pricking, or numbness of a
person’s skin) (9). Symptoms of paresthesia are triggered by a high
and acute single dose and disappear within approximately 1 hour
after the ingestion (9, 104).
Sodium Bicarbonate
Sodium bicarbonate is an antacid (alkalinizing agent), meaning that
it counteracts or neutralizes acid (low pH). Sodium bicarbonate is
naturally formed in the body and is also found in baking soda.
Supplementation with sodium bicarbonate has been shown to
increase the pH of blood (198). A pH difference is created between
the inside and outside of muscle cells that causes an accelerated
movement of H+ out of the contracting muscle, helping to regulate
intramuscular pH. Supplementing with sodium bicarbonate has been
shown to improve MBC and in turn high-intensity exercise
performance.
Efficacy
Most research investigating the efficacy of sodium bicarbonate for
enhancing sport performance has focused on short bouts of high-
intensity exercise lasting 60 seconds to 6 minutes (150).
McNaughton and colleagues (148) have demonstrated improved
short-term, high-intensity work from acute sodium bicarbonate
supplementation. Hobson and colleagues (111) examined the effects
of sodium bicarbonate ingestion during a 2,000-meter (2,187 yd)
rowing ergometer time trial in experienced male rowers. The rowers
were supplemented before exercise with 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass of sodium bicarbonate or a placebo. Time to complete
the 2,000 meters and time taken for each 500-meter (547 yd) split
were recorded. While there were no significant differences in the
overall 2,000-meter time trial, the sodium bicarbonate did result in
significant improvements in the third and final 500-meter time splits.
Some investigations (26, 140), but not all (10), have reported similar
improvements in high-intensity exercise following 0.3 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium bicarbonate supplementation. The
709

timing of the sodium bicarbonate ingestion used in many scientific
investigations is typically 60 to 90 minutes before the bout of
exercise.
Adverse Effects
It appears that a dosage of 0.3 grams per kilogram body mass (136
mg/lb body mass) sodium bicarbonate ingested approximately 60 to
180 minutes before activity improves short-duration, high-intensity
exercise performance (97, 111, 150). Dosages above this amount
have been associated with unpleasant side effects such as diarrhea,
cramping, nausea, and vomiting. A more tolerable dose (0.2 g/kg
[91 mg/lb] body weight) has been shown to reduce these side
effects; however, research has revealed that this dose does not
improve exercise performance (139). It appears that a sodium
bicarbonate dose ranging from 0.3 to 0.5 grams per kilogram body
mass, 60 to 180 minutes before exercise, is optimal for improvement
of performance (97). Due to the severity of the side effects (which
may be experienced by some athletes even when ingesting 0.3 g/kg
body mass), many sport scientists recommend that athletes try
sodium bicarbonate supplementation during practice before using it
as a precompetition aid.
Sodium Citrate
Although sodium citrate is not actually a base, it can increase blood
pH without the gastrointestinal distress that is commonly seen with
sodium bicarbonate supplementation (211). It is believed that once
in the blood, sodium citrate actually breaks down into bicarbonate,
thus increasing the extracellular pH. As a result, sodium citrate
would help regulate intramuscular pH during high-intensity exercise
by the same mechanism as sodium bicarbonate.
Efficacy
The data are equivocal in terms of the effectiveness of sodium
citrate’s ergogenic potential during short-duration, high-intensity
exercise, with some investigations reporting no benefit (13, 211) and
710

others having observed an ergogenic effect (141, 149). For example,
a dose of 200 milligrams per pound body mass (0.44 g/kg body
weight) given 60 to 90 minutes before exercise led to significant
improvement (about 20% greater) in leg muscular endurance during
maximal isometric knee extensions (105). However, more research is
needed before sodium citrate can be recommended before a
workout or competition for performance enhancement.
Adverse Effects
Sodium citrate may possess MBC and has been used without the
typical gastrointestinal discomfort usually associated with sodium
bicarbonate ingestion (13, 141). Even though it appears that the
adverse effects of sodium citrate supplementation are lower than
those of sodium bicarbonate, ingestion of 0.4 to 0.6 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium citrate has the potential to cause
gastrointestinal distress (161). The gastrointestinal response seems
to vary between individuals; therefore, athletes should individually
test sodium citrate supplementation before using it in competition.
L-Carnitine
L-carnitine is synthesized from the amino acids lysine and
methionine and is responsible for the transport of fatty acids from
the cytosol into the mitochondria to be oxidized for energy.
Carnitine’s role in lipid oxidation has generated interest in its efficacy
as a dietary supplement, primarily to enhance exercise performance
by increasing fat use and sparing muscle glycogen. However, studies
examining L-carnitine’s role as an ergogenic aid for increasing lipid
oxidation and subsequently enhancing performance are inconsistent
(85). Although Bacurau and colleagues (11) showed enhanced fatty
acid oxidation following three weeks of L-carnitine supplementation,
which was attributed to a greater carnitine content in the muscle,
most studies have been unable to demonstrate elevated muscle
carnitine levels following supplementation (218). This may be related
to limits in the amount of carnitine that can be absorbed through
oral supplementation, or potentially related to limits in the amount of
711

fat that can be transported into the mitochondria through the
carnitine system due to feedback regulators within the muscle, such
as malonyl–coenzyme A, which is a product of metabolism.
Efficacy
Interestingly, several studies have suggested that L-carnitine may
enhance recovery from exercise (119, 216). Decreases in pain and
muscle damage (84), decreases in markers of metabolic stress
(195), and enhanced recovery (216) have also been demonstrated
following 
high-intensity 
resistance 
exercise 
in 
untrained 
or
recreationally trained individuals who supplemented with L-carnitine.
The mechanisms that have been proposed involve enhancing blood
flow regulation through an enhanced vasodilatory effect that reduces
the magnitude of exercise-induced hypoxia (120). In addition,
Kraemer and colleagues indicated that L-carnitine supplementation
(2 g/day for three weeks) upregulates androgen receptors (132) and
increases IGF binding proteins that preserve IGF-1 concentrations
(133). These endocrine adaptations from the supplement may have
an important role in the enhanced recovery seen following high-
intensity exercise.
Adverse Effects
Up to 3 grams of daily L-carnitine supplementation (for three weeks)
appears to be well tolerated in healthy volunteers, with no adverse
subjective, hematological, or metabolic events reported (183).
However, as with most supplements, this information should not be
extrapolated to suggest the safety of greater dosing or of use for
prolonged supplementation periods.
Creatine
Creatine is a nitrogenous organic compound that is synthesized
naturally in the body, primarily in the liver, and helps to supply
energy to all cells in the body. It can also be synthesized in smaller
amounts in both the kidneys and pancreas. The amino acids
712

arginine, glycine, and methionine are the precursors for the
synthesis of creatine in those organs. Creatine can also be obtained
through dietary sources. It is found in relative abundance in both
meat and fish. Approximately 98% of creatine is stored within
skeletal muscle in either its free form (40%) or its phosphorylated
form (60%). Smaller amounts of creatine are also stored in the
heart, brain, and testes. Creatine is transported from its site of
synthesis to the skeletal muscle via circulation.
Importance of Creatine to Exercise
Creatine, in the form of creatine phosphate (CP; also called
phosphocreatine [PCr]), has an essential role in energy metabolism
as a substrate for the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by
rephosphorylating adenosine diphosphate (ADP), especially during
short-duration, high-intensity exercise. The ability to rapidly
rephosphorylate ADP is dependent on the enzyme creatine kinase
and the availability of CP within the muscle. As CP stores become
depleted, the ability to perform high-intensity exercise declines. In
short-duration sprints (e.g., a 100 m sprint), the energy for fueling
the activity is derived primarily through the hydrolysis of CP.
However, as high-intensity exercise increases in duration, the ability
of CP to serve as an energy source is drastically reduced.
Depletion of muscle CP during high-intensity exercise is the
primary mechanism leading to fatigue in such events. During a 6-
second bout of maximal exercise, CP levels within the muscle are
reduced 35% to 57% from resting levels (81). As the duration of
high-intensity exercise increases to 30 seconds, CP levels in the
muscle are further reduced by approximately 64% to 80% from
resting levels (28, 40); during bouts of repeated high-intensity
exercise, CP levels in the muscle are almost completely depleted
(147). As muscle CP concentrations decrease, the ability to perform
maximal exercise is reduced. Hirvonen and colleagues (110)
demonstrated that sprint times were slower as CP concentrations
were reduced. It stands to reason that if muscle CP concentrations
713

could be maintained, the ability to sustain high-intensity exercise
would be improved. This is the basis for creatine supplementation in
athletes.
Creatine Supplementation
Survey-based studies suggest that the prevalence of creatine use
among athletes and military personnel is about 15% to 40%, with
use more common in male strength or power athletes (134). As a
result of their widespread use, creatine supplements may be the
most extensively studied ergogenic aid in recent history. Creatine
supplementation is reported to increase the creatine content of
muscles by approximately 20% (65, 121). However, it appears that a
saturation limit for creatine exists within muscle. Once creatine
concentrations in skeletal muscle reach 150 to 160 mmol per
kilogram dry weight, additional supplementation appears to be
unable to further increase muscle creatine concentrations (92). This
has important implications for the “more is better” philosophy that
governs the thinking of some athletes and may affect the
development of proper and realistic dosing strategies.
A typical creatine supplementation regimen involves a loading
dose of 20 to 25 grams daily for five days, or 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass if an individual wishes to dose relative to body weight,
followed by a maintenance dose of 2 grams per day (121). If one
ingests creatine without an initial loading dose, muscle creatine
content will reach levels similar to those seen in people who do
initially use a loading dose, but reaching that muscle creatine
concentration will take longer (~30 days vs. 5 days). Muscle creatine
levels will remain elevated as long as the maintenance dose is
maintained (2 g/day or 0.03 g/kg body mass per day) (121). Once
creatine supplementation is stopped, muscle creatine levels will
return to baseline levels in approximately four weeks (65, 121).
While most of the available research involving creatine
supplementation has focused on skeletal muscle, a small body of
accumulating research has focused on creatine and potential
714

cognitive benefits. Creatine supplementation can increase brain
creatine content in humans, but higher and more prolonged dosing
strategies than those typically used to increase muscle creatine
levels are required to increase brain creatine (57). At this time, the
optimal dosing strategies needed to induce this response are
currently unknown, but this is an active area of research. It appears
that creatine is most likely to exert an influence in situations where
cognitive processes are stressed (e.g., during sleep deprivation,
experimental 
hypoxia, 
and 
cognitively 
demanding 
tasks).
Furthermore, creatine has shown some promise for attenuating
symptoms of concussion, mild traumatic brain injury, and depression
(72).
Efficacy
Most studies examining the effect of creatine supplementation on
strength performance have been fairly consistent in showing
significant ergogenic benefits (figure 12.5) (217). Strength increases
in the bench press, squat, and power clean may be two to three
times higher in trained athletes supplementing with creatine
compared to placebo (113). These results may highlight the benefit
of creatine supplementation in experienced resistance-trained
athletes whose potential to improve strength may be limited. In
experienced strength athletes, supplementing with creatine may also
enhance the quality of workouts (less fatigue, enhanced recovery),
which may be crucial for providing a greater training stimulus to the
muscle.
715

FIGURE 12.5 Approximate changes in performance variables following creatine
supplementation.
Data from Wax et al. (2021).
Creatine supplementation has been shown to increase
maximal strength, power, and lean body mass in both
trained and untrained populations. Additionally, creatine
supplementation is safe and relatively inexpensive.
Most studies examining the effects of creatine supplementation on
a single bout of explosive exercise (sprint performance) have not
shown any significant performance improvements (129, 155).
However, in many of these studies, subjects were supplemented with
a loading dose for only five days (129, 155). While ingesting creatine
with a loading dose for five days will significantly increase
intramuscular creatine stores, this is likely not enough time for
training adaptations to occur and to be manifested in explosive
exercise 
performance 
improvements. 
When 
subjects 
have
supplemented for an extended period of time (28-84 days),
significant improvements in jump and power performance have been
716

seen (215). It appears that creatine is more effective as a training
supplement than as a direct performance enhancer.
Body Mass Changes
Prolonged creatine supplementation has been generally associated
with increases in body weight. These increases appear to primarily
relate to increases in fat-free mass. The increase in body mass is
believed to be partly related to an increase in total body water. The
water retention phenomenon occurs in the early stages (first several
days) of supplementation (102). An increase in creatine content
within the muscle is thought to enhance the intracellular osmotic
gradient, causing water to fill the cell (8). In general, creatine
supplementation during training is typically associated with a 1- to 4-
pound (0.5-1.8 kg) greater increase in body mass or fat-free mass
(71) over a period of several weeks to several months.
Adverse Effects
Increase in body mass could be a potential unwanted side effect of
creatine supplementation, particularly in relation to strength-to-mass
or power-to-mass ratio. However, in athletes supplementing with
creatine, weight gain is often a desired outcome. When people talk
about side effects from a drug or supplement, they are generally
referring to a potentially debilitating effect. There have been many
anecdotal reports of gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and muscular
problems, including muscle cramps, in association with creatine
ingestion. However, controlled studies have been unable to
document any significant side effects from creatine supplementation.
Even during prolonged supplementation (several weeks up to many
months), no increases in reported side effects were noted in subjects
supplementing 
with 
creatine—either 
competitive 
athletes 
or
recreationally trained individuals (8).
Another concern with any supplement is the long-term health
effects. A retrospective study on health variables in 26 former or
current competitive athletes who had used creatine for up to four
717

years indicated only occasional gastrointestinal upset during the
loading phase (185). These disturbances ranged from gas to mild
diarrhea. Other hypothesized major concerns during creatine
supplementation include a strain on the kidneys due to the high
nitrogen content of creatine and increased creatine excretion during
short-term ingestion. However, no renal dysfunction has been
reported with either short-term (five days) or long-term (up to five
years) creatine use (170, 171).
Despite certain media and anecdotal reports linking
creatine supplementation to dehydration and cramping,
there is no reason to believe that creatine enhances the
risk for these side effects.
Stimulants
There is little question about the usefulness of stimulants to many
types of athletic endeavors; the effects of stimulants include reduced
fatigue, increased alertness, increased confidence, and even
euphoria. Because stimulants have to be used at the time of
competition to confer an ergogenic advantage, drug testing
performed immediately after the competition can effectively reduce
their abuse (118). However, many stimulants (e.g., caffeine) are also
available in food items, while others (e.g., ephedrine) may be found
in decongestants and other medications.
Caffeine
Caffeine is a multifaceted supplement used in athletics and is
popular among both aerobic endurance and resistance training
athletes. It is found in coffee, tea, soft drinks, chocolate, and various
other foods. It is a central nervous system stimulant, and its effects
are 
similar 
to, 
yet 
weaker 
than, 
those 
associated 
with
amphetamines. Caffeine has been used as a performance enhancer
for more than 40 years and is one of the few ergogenic aids that
may be used comparably by aerobic and anaerobic athletes.
718

The mechanism to explain endurance improvements is unclear.
One of the mechanisms that has been proposed involves an increase
in fat oxidation through the mobilization of free fatty acids from
adipose tissue or intramuscular fat stores (90). The greater use of
fat as a primary energy source slows glycogen depletion and delays
fatigue. Alterations in muscle metabolism alone cannot fully explain
the ergogenic effect of caffeine. During short-duration, high-intensity
exercise, the primary ergogenic effect attributed to caffeine
supplementation is enhanced power production. This is thought to
be the result of an enhanced excitation–contraction coupling,
affecting 
neuromuscular 
transmission 
and 
mobilization 
of
intracellular calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (90).
Efficacy
For the aerobic athlete, caffeine is thought to prolong aerobic
endurance exercise (221). Initial studies dealing with the effect of
caffeine supplementation on aerobic endurance performance
indicated a 21-minute improvement in the time to exhaustion (from
75 min in a placebo trial to 96 min in the caffeine trial) during
cycling at 80% of V̇O2max (49). These results were confirmed by
other investigations demonstrating the ergogenic effect of caffeine
during prolonged aerobic endurance activity (17). These studies
showed that caffeine in doses ranging from 3 to 9 milligrams per
kilogram (equivalent to approximately 1.5 to 3.5 cups of automatic
drip coffee in a 70 kg [154 lb] person) produced a significant
ergogenic effect. Similar performance effects from caffeine have also
been demonstrated during short-duration, high-intensity exercise
(34, 58).
When the effects of caffeine ingestion on sprint or power
performance are examined, however, the ergogenic benefits become
less clear. Several studies have shown that caffeine ingestion does
not improve power performance (46, 96), but those studies used
recreational athletes. In elite judo athletes ingesting caffeine (5
mg/kg), it was reported that peak power was significantly improved
in comparison with a placebo treatment (194).
719

Similarly, in competitive swimmers, caffeine ingestion (250 mg)
was shown to improve sprint times during repeated 100-meter (109
yd) sprints by an average of 3% (47). The number of studies on
caffeine ingestion and sprint and power performance is limited
compared to the number that measured caffeine’s effect on aerobic
endurance performance. Thus, the results of the studies on the
ergogenic 
benefit 
of 
caffeine 
for 
power 
performance 
are
inconclusive. If any performance benefit occurs, it is likely in the
trained athlete.
Caffeine from a food source (coffee consumption) and anhydrous
caffeine have both shown significant performance effects; however,
the extent of performance improvements appears to be greater
when caffeine is ingested in tablet form (91). When caffeine is
provided as a pure caffeine supplement, the ergogenic benefit with
respect to improved aerobic endurance performance has been
reported to range between 28% and 43% (91). However, when it is
provided in a food source such as coffee (either caffeinated coffee or
decaffeinated coffee with added caffeine), the ergogenic benefit for
aerobic endurance exercise may not be seen (91). Graham and
colleagues (91) suggested that although the bioavailability of
caffeine is the same whether it is consumed in a food source or in an
anhydrous form, some compound in coffee antagonizes the action of
caffeine.
In doses of 3 to 9 milligrams per kilogram body weight
consumed approximately 60 minutes before exercise or
during prolonged exercise, caffeine is ergogenic. No
further benefit is observed when it is consumed at
higher dosages (≥9 mg/kg). It can decrease feelings of
perceived exertion, improve work capacity, and increase
mental alertness. The scientific literature does not
support caffeine-induced diuresis during exercise or any
harmful change in fluid balance that would negatively
affect performance.
720

Adverse Effects
The 
side 
effects 
associated 
with 
caffeine 
include 
anxiety,
gastrointestinal disturbances, restlessness, insomnia, tremors, and
heart arrhythmias. Caffeine is also physically addicting, and
discontinuation can result in some withdrawal symptoms, such as
headache, fatigue, dysphoric mood, difficulty concentrating, and flu-
like somatic symptoms (200). Caffeine intakes greater than 9
milligrams per kilogram appear to result in a greater risk for side
effects (99). Caffeine overdose is an issue that can have potentially
fatal consequences. A lethal dose of caffeine is typically in excess of
5 grams, which equates to about 42 cups of coffee at 120 milligrams
of caffeine per cup (128) or twenty-five 200-milligram tablets of
caffeine.
Preworkout Energy Drinks
Energy drinks were initially introduced to the market in the United
States in the 1990s and have since become one of the biggest
selling functional beverages in the industry with annual sales
projected to surpass $21 billion by the year 2026 (123). The primary
reasons for ingesting energy drinks include enhancing workouts,
improving sport performance, and facilitating faster training
adaptations (168). The ingredients most common to commercially
available energy drinks are caffeine, taurine, ginseng, guarana,
carbohydrates, B vitamins, tyrosine, and ginkgo biloba, among
others. Of these ingredients, caffeine and carbohydrate are the
primary ergogenic nutrients in energy drinks (123).
Efficacy
Preworkout energy drinks have been investigated for their
effectiveness on several modes of exercise, including resistance
exercise, anaerobic exercise, and aerobic endurance exercise. In
relation to resistance exercise performance, Forbes and colleagues
(70) gave 15 physically active college-aged students a commercially
available energy drink or an isocaloric noncaffeinated placebo 60
minutes before exercise. The energy drink was standardized with 2
721

milligrams of caffeine per kilogram body mass. The exercise bout
consisted of 3 sets of 70% 1RM bench press conducted to failure on
each set with 1 minute of rest between each set. The energy drink
significantly increased bench press performance as compared to the
placebo treatment. Other studies investigating the effects of
preworkout 
energy 
drink 
consumption 
have 
also 
reported
improvements in upper and lower body total lifting volume (54, 86).
While it appears that preworkout energy drink ingestion is effective
for increasing resistance training volume performance, other types of
anaerobic exercise (including Wingate tests and speed or agility
performance) are not as responsive to energy drink consumption
(70, 114). In terms of aerobic endurance exercise performance,
some investigations (122), but not all (36), have reported that
energy drinks containing approximately 2 milligrams of caffeine per
kilogram body mass, consumed within an hour before exercise,
improve cycling and running performance in trained cyclists and
recreationally active individuals (123). Interestingly, the amount of
caffeine (2 mg/kg body mass) in the energy drinks is less than the
amount recommended for an enhancement of exercise performance
(3-9 mg/kg body mass). This contributes to the hypothesis that the
synergistic effects of the various ingredients in energy drinks may be
responsible for the reported improvements in exercise performance
(123).
Adverse Effects
The safety issues surrounding energy drink consumption appear
related to excessive caffeine intake (187) and the detrimental effects
of mixing energy drinks with alcohol (187). The mixing of energy
drinks with alcohol is more prevalent in certain social contexts and is
not a common practice for those consuming energy drinks before a
workout to enhance work capacity or to facilitate faster training
adaptations. Due to the presence of caffeine in most energy drinks,
the same potential adverse effects that exist for caffeine also exist
for energy drinks. However, most energy drinks contain only
moderate amounts of caffeine, typically less than 300 milligrams
722

(187). Even though energy drinks typically contain low to moderate
doses of caffeine, one should recognize that it is possible to
overdose on caffeine through the consumption of energy drinks
(116). While there is some information related to the side effects of
excess caffeine ingestion, energy drinks contain other ingredients
and stimulants. Currently, it is unknown whether inclusion of other
stimulants in energy drinks may increase or decrease the threshold
for experiencing side effects. Therefore, more research is needed to
determine the long-term effects of habitual intake of energy drinks
before definitive conclusions can be drawn.
Ephedrine
Another stimulant, ephedrine, has been widely used throughout the
world for temporary relief from the symptoms of bronchial asthma,
bronchitis, allergies, shortness of breath, cold and flu symptoms, and
other ailments. Ephedrine is also very popular among bodybuilders
due to its strong thermogenic quality. A thermogenic supplement or
drug works by elevating basal metabolic rate, thereby increasing
energy expenditure and ultimately resulting in fat loss. It often is
used as a stacking agent with caffeine to enhance the thermogenic
effect.
Efficacy
Studies examining the ergogenic effect of ephedrine have shown it
to be effective only when it is taken in combination with caffeine
(21). These results have been quite consistent with regard to
improving aerobic endurance performance (20). In terms of
anaerobic exercise performance, the scientific literature investigating
the combination of ephedrine and caffeine is equivocal (224).
However, side effects (vomiting and nausea) following exercise have
been reported in 25% of the subjects ingesting a mixture of 5
milligrams per kilogram caffeine and 1 milligram per kilogram
ephedrine (19). A subsequent study performed by the same
investigators showed that at a lower dose (4 mg/kg caffeine and 0.8
723

mg/kg ephedrine), similar ergogenic benefits were realized with no
side effects (20).
Adverse Effects
Ephedra, also called ma huang, is a plant that contains ephedrine. In
the United States before 2004, most over-the-counter sport and
weight-loss products contained ephedra. However, in April 2004, the
FDA banned all products containing ephedra after determining that it
posed an unreasonable risk to those who used it. The FDA ban was
based on a report published by the Rand Institute (188) indicating
that 16,000 adverse events were linked to the use of ephedra-
containing dietary supplements. Further, Shekelle and colleagues
(188) reported that the use of ephedra-containing dietary
supplements or ephedrine plus caffeine was associated with an
increased incidence of nausea, vomiting, psychiatric symptoms such
as anxiety and change in mood, autonomic hyperactivity,
palpitations, and, in a few cases, death. As a result of the many
adverse effects, ephedrine use has been banned by most sport
governing bodies, including the International Olympic Committee.
Citrus Aurantium
Citrus aurantium is from a fruit commonly known as bitter orange
and is often used as an Asian herbal medicine to treat digestive
problems (80, 100). However, it is also a mild stimulant and is
thought to contribute to appetite suppression and increased
metabolic rate and lipolysis (80, 100).
Efficacy
When citrus aurantium is combined with caffeine and other herbal
products, significant improvements in time to fatigue have been
reported 
(199). 
Citrus 
aurantium 
contains 
synephrine, 
a
sympathomimetic agent, which some have suggested stimulates
specific beta adrenergic receptors (β-3, but not β-1 or β-2) that in
turn stimulate fat metabolism without any of the negative side
effects generally associated with compounds that stimulate the other
724

adrenergic receptors (38). Synephrine, a known active component of
citrus aurantium, is thought to interact with β-3 receptors to increase
lipolysis (i.e., the breakdown of body fat) and minimize the
cardiovascular effect typical of adrenergic amines (38). Currently, not
enough data on citrus aurantium alone have been published to
recommend its use as a performance-enhancing supplement.
Adverse Effects
Synephrine has been shown to stimulate peripheral α-1 receptors,
resulting in vasoconstriction and elevations in blood pressure (31).
However, other research has shown that when citrus aurantium is
ingested alone, no effect on blood pressure is seen (103), but in
combination with other herbal products it may cause significant
elevations in systolic blood pressure (103). It should be noted that
synephrine is currently on the National Collegiate Athletic
Association’s banned list of performance-enhancing drugs.
Summary of Ergogenic and Non-Ergogenic
Dietary Supplements and Their Application
Essential amino acids and branched-chain amino acids. Ability to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis, particularly via the anabolic effects of the
amino acid leucine
Arginine. Not effective for inducing nitric oxide or muscle blood flow in
healthy individuals; also does not appear to have any effect on improving
endurance performance in healthy populations
β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate 
(HMB). 
Most 
effective 
for 
trained
individuals participating in a high-intensity, high-volume resistance training
program
β-Alanine. Effective as a performance-enhancing substance in exercises
inducing a high level of lactic acid, such as multiple bouts of high-intensity
exercises lasting more than 60 seconds
Sodium bicarbonate. Has been shown to improve high-intensity exercise
performance and training but is associated with unpleasant side effects
consistent with gastrointestinal discomfort, which would likely decrease
performance
725

Sodium citrate. Inconclusive scientific data in relation to sodium citrate’s
ergogenic potential during short-duration, high-intensity exercise
L-carnitine. May enhance recovery following high-intensity resistance
exercise
Creatine. Effective for increasing maximal strength, power, lean body mass,
and sprint performance in both trained and untrained populations; no other
sport supplement is supported by the same level of positive research
Caffeine. Effective for prolonging aerobic endurance exercise, but its effects
on sprint or power performance are less clear
Preworkout energy drinks. Effective for increasing resistance training
volume performance and endurance performance but not ergogenic in their
ability to improve anaerobic exercise (high-intensity cycling and speed or
agility performance)
Ephedrine. When combined with caffeine, is able to improve aerobic
endurance performance; not as effective in improving anaerobic exercise
performance
Citrus aurantium. When combined with caffeine and other herbal products,
improvements in exercise time to fatigue (a measure of endurance
performance) have been reported
726

Conclusion
Athletes are frequently exposed to information about ergogenic aids.
Strength and conditioning professionals play an integral part in the
decision-making process regarding which ergogenic aids athletes
choose to take. Therefore, it is imperative that strength and
conditioning professionals stay up to date on the latest scientific
findings on what ergogenic aids are safe, effective, and legal. If
strength and conditioning professionals fail in this area, the athletes
they serve will be more susceptible to hyped marketing, potentially
false advertising, and influence by others who may not have the
athlete’s best interests in mind. The information contained in this
chapter serves the strength and conditioning professional by
providing fundamental information on performance-enhancing
substances, including which substances are banned, effective or
noneffective, and safe.
KEY TERMS
acromegaly
anabolic steroid
androgenic
β-agonists
β-blockers
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB)
branched-chain amino acids (BCAA)
caffeine
creatine
dietary supplement
ergogenic aid
ergolytic
erythropoietin (EPO)
essential amino acids (EAA)
human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
727

human growth hormone (HGH)
insulin
lipolysis
muscle buffering capacity (MBC)
muscle dysmorphia
peptides
random drug tests
selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs)
stacking
testosterone
thermogenesis
vasodilation
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following hormones is responsible for enhancing
the ability to deliver oxygen to contracting skeletal muscle?
  a.  erythropoietin
  b.  insulin
  c.  human growth hormone
  d.  testosterone
  2.  What are the effects of evening binge alcohol consumption on
sleep and autonomic function?
  a.  It improves sleep quality, increases cardiac vagal tone, and
impairs blood pressure regulation.
  b.  It has no significant impact on sleep or autonomic
function.
  c.  It disrupts sleeping cardiac vagal tone, reduces sleep
quality, increases sympathoexcitation, and disrupts blood
pressure regulation.
  d.  It improves blood pressure regulation and reduces
sympathoexcitation during sleep.
  3.  What organization prohibits the use of SARMs in and outside
of competition for all athletes?
728
