CHAPTER 13
PRINCIPLES OF TEST
SELECTION AND
ADMINISTRATION
Claire Brady, PhD, and John McMahon, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Michael McGuigan
and Everett Harman to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identify and explain reasons for performing tests with athletes;
understand testing terminology to communicate clearly with
athletes and colleagues;
evaluate the validity and reliability of a test and its metrics;
select appropriate tests and metrics; and
administer test protocols properly and safely.
The 
strength 
and 
conditioning 
professional 
with 
a 
broad
understanding of exercise and sport science can effectively use tests
and measurements to make training decisions that help athletes
achieve their goals, maximize their performance potential, reduce
injury risk, or facilitate recovery from fatigue and injury. Tests and
measurements form the objective core of the athlete evaluation
process. This chapter covers the reasons for testing, testing
729

terminology, evaluation of test quality, the selection of appropriate
tests and metrics, and aspects of proper test administration.
730

Reasons for Testing
Testing helps athletes and coaches objectively assess athletic talent
and identify physical abilities and areas in need of improvement. In
addition, test scores can be used in goal setting by setting attainable
benchmarks for athletes to aim for. Baseline measurements can be
used to establish starting points against which achievable training
goals can be set, and testing at regular intervals can help track an
athlete’s progress in reaching those goals and provide insight into
fatigue, readiness, and injury risk. Using tests as a basis for goal
setting allows coaches to set specific goals for individual athletes
that, when taken together, help to accomplish group or team
objectives (see chapter 9 for more information about goal setting).
Assessment of Athletic Talent
It is important for a coach to determine whether an individual has
the physical potential to play a sport at the competitive level of the
team. That judgment is not difficult if the candidate has already
excelled at the sport elsewhere and is of adequate body size.
However, in many cases, candidates have not clearly demonstrated
their competitive abilities or may lack experience in the sport. The
coach then needs some way of determining whether the candidate
has the necessary basic physical abilities that, in combination with
technique training and practice, could produce a competitive player.
Field tests serve as tools for such assessment, and this application of
testing is referred to as talent identification.
Identification of Physical Abilities in Need
of Improvement
While some physical abilities are innate and not amenable to
change, other physical abilities can be improved through training. By
using appropriate testing methods and analysis, the strength and
conditioning professional can determine which physical qualities can
be targeted by participation in prescribed exercise programs (28,
731

29). This can only be achieved with an understanding of normative
data for key test metrics (see chapter 14 for normative data
examples); this allows the strength and conditioning practitioner to
objectively compare athletes’ performances to representative
normative values and identify relative strengths and areas for
improvement.
Evidence-Based Testing
Evidence-based testing is essential, because it ensures that training programs are
based on scientific research and empirical evidence, which are both equally
important. Some of the key reasons for this follow:
Validity and reliability. Evidence-based testing provides a framework for
selecting tests that are both valid and reliable. By using validated and reliable
tests, practitioners can confidently assess an athlete’s capabilities and track
progress.
Individualization. Every athlete has distinct strengths, weaknesses, and
goals. Evidence-based testing allows practitioners to modify training
programs to the specific needs of each athlete. By conducting assessments
based on scientific evidence, strength and conditioning professionals can
identify areas in need of improvement and develop targeted interventions to
optimize performance.
Injury prevention. Evidence-based testing helps identify biomechanically
inefficient movement patterns and muscular imbalances that may predispose
athletes to injury. By addressing these issues through targeted training
interventions, strength and conditioning professionals can reduce the risk of
injury and enhance athletic longevity.
Performance optimization. Evidence-based testing enables strength and
conditioning professionals to identify performance-limiting factors and
develop strategies to optimize athletic performance. By assessing key
physiological parameters such as strength, power, agility, and aerobic
endurance, strength and conditioning professionals can design training
programs that target specific areas for improvement, leading to enhanced
athletic performance.
Monitoring progress. Regular assessment is essential for monitoring
progress and evaluating the effectiveness of training interventions. Evidence-
based testing provides objective measures of performance that allows
strength and conditioning professionals to track changes over time and make
data-driven decisions regarding program modifications. This ensures that
training programs remain aligned with performance goals.
732

Professional credibility. In an increasingly competitive field, evidence-
based practice enhances the credibility and reputation of strength and
conditioning professionals. By basing their work in scientific evidence,
practitioners demonstrate a commitment to excellence and professionalism.
A variety of reputable sources, such as the following, can be used to ensure that
assessments and practices are grounded in scientific evidence:
Peer-reviewed journals
Academic textbooks
Professional organizations
Meta-analyses and systematic reviews
Conferences and workshops
Evidence-based practice databases
In-house data collection
Screening for Fatigue and Injury Risk
Monitoring acute and chronic fatigue due to training and competition
exposures and associated injury risk factors can allow the strength
and conditioning professional to prospectively modulate training
programs to promote athlete health and performance. Although both
fatigue and injury risk mechanisms are complex and multifaceted,
combining quantitative and qualitative tests can provide valuable
insights for the strength and conditioning professional and inform
any requirements for acute adjustments to predetermined training
programs, particularly during the competition period.
Testing can be used to assess athletic talent, identify
physical abilities and areas in need of improvement, set
goals, and evaluate progress.
733

Testing Terminology
To communicate clearly with athletes and colleagues, strength and
conditioning professionals should use consistent terminology. The
following terms and definitions are widely accepted and are used in
this text:
test—A procedure for assessing ability in a particular endeavor.
monitoring—Taking repeat measures of an athlete to help guide
the training process with appropriate data.
field test—A test used to assess ability that is performed away
from the laboratory and does not require extensive training or
expensive equipment (11).
measurement—The process of collecting test data (15).
evaluation—The process of analyzing test results for the purpose
of making decisions. For example, a strength and conditioning
professional examines the results of physical performance tests to
determine whether the athlete’s training program is effective in
helping achieve the training goals or whether modifications in the
program are needed.
pretest—A test administered before the beginning of training to
determine the athlete’s initial basic ability levels. A pretest allows
the strength and conditioning professional to design the training
program in keeping with the athlete’s initial training level and the
overall program objectives.
midtest—A test administered one or more times during the
training period to assess progress and modify the program as
needed to maximize benefit.
formative evaluation—Periodic reevaluation based on midtests
administered during the training, usually at regular intervals (2).
It enables monitoring of the athlete’s progress and adjustment of
the training program according to the athlete’s individual needs. It
also allows evaluation of different training methods and collection
734

of normative data. Regular modification of the training program
based on formative evaluation keeps the training program fresh
and interesting and helps avoid physical and mental staleness.
posttest—Test administered after the training period to determine
the success of the training program in achieving the training
objectives.
735

Evaluation of Test Quality
Test results are valuable only when two key criteria are met: validity
and reliability. Validity ensures the test accurately measures its
intended attribute, while reliability guarantees consistency in
measurement 
across 
multiple 
instances. 
These 
fundamental
characteristics are essential in assessing the quality of a test and its
associated metrics. Both must meet acceptable standards for the
test to provide meaningful benefits.
Validity
Validity refers to the degree to which a test or test item measures
what it is supposed to measure and is one of the most important
characteristics of testing (2, 25). For tests of physical properties such
as height and weight, validity is easy to establish. For example, close
correspondence between the readings on a spring scale and the
readings on a calibrated balance scale indicates validity of weighing
with the spring scale. The validity of tests of basic athletic abilities or
capacities is more difficult to establish. There are several types of
validity, including construct validity, face validity, content validity, and
criterion validity.
To be valid, physical performance tests should measure
abilities important in the sport, produce repeatable
results (see the later section on reliability), measure the
performance of one athlete at a time (unless otherwise
specified in the protocol), appear meaningful, be of
suitable difficulty, be able to differentiate between
various levels of ability, permit accurate scoring, include
a sufficient number of trials, and withstand the test of
statistical evaluation. Given the choice between two
valid tests, consideration should be given to simplicity
and economy of test administration.
736

Construct Validity
Construct validity is the ability of a test to represent the
underlying construct (the theory developed to organize and explain
some aspects of existing knowledge and observations). Construct
validity refers to overall validity, or the extent to which the test
actually measures what it was designed to measure (24). Face
validity, content validity, and criterion validity, defined next, are
secondary to and provide evidence for construct validity. Within
construct validity, there are two important subtypes: convergent
validity and discriminant validity. Both are crucial in the
development and evaluation of measurement tools. Convergent
validity is evidenced by high positive correlations between results of
the test being assessed and those of the recognized measure of the
construct (the “gold standard”). A test may be preferable to the gold
standard if it exhibits convergent validity with the standard but is
less demanding in terms of time, equipment, expense, or expertise.
Convergent validity would be demonstrated if scores on the 1RM
back squat test and the isometric squat test (requiring force plate
technology) are highly correlated, indicating that both tests are
effectively measuring the same underlying construct (lower body
strength).
Discriminant validity is the ability of a test to distinguish between
two different constructs and is evidenced by a low correlation
between the results of the test and those of tests of a different
construct (2). Discriminant validity would be established if scores on
the 1RM back squat test do not show a correlation with V̇O2max
scores, indicating that the squat test is specifically measuring
strength and not endurance (two different constructs).
Face Validity
Face validity is the appearance to the athlete and other casual
observers that the test measures what it is purported to measure. If
a test or test item has face validity, the athlete is more likely to
respond to it positively (1). The assessment of face validity is
737

generally informal and nonquantitative. In other fields, such as
psychology, tests may be deliberately constructed to have poor face
validity because if examinees realize what a test or test item is
supposed to measure, they can answer deceptively to manipulate
their scores. For tests of basic athletic abilities, however, face validity
is desirable based on the assumption that anyone taking a test of
physical ability wants to do well and is thus motivated by a test that
appears to measure a relevant capability.
Content Validity
Content validity is the assessment by experts that the testing
covers all relevant subtopics or component abilities in appropriate
proportions (1). For athletic testing, these include all the component
abilities needed for a particular sport or sport position. Examples of
component abilities in athletics are jumping ability, sprinting ability,
and lower body strength (37). For example, a test battery for
potential soccer players should include, at minimum, tests of
sprinting speed, agility, aerobic endurance, and kicking power. To
ensure content validity, the test developer should list the ability
components to be assessed and make sure they are all represented
on the test. In addition, the proportion of the total score attributable
to a particular component ability should be proportional to the
importance of that component to total performance. While the terms
face 
validity 
and 
content 
validity 
are 
sometimes 
used
interchangeably, the latter relates to actual validity while the former
relates to the appearance of validity to nonexperts (1).
Criterion Validity
Criterion validity is the extent to which test scores are associated
with some other measure of the same ability. There are two types of
criterion validity: concurrent and predictive.
Concurrent validity is the extent to which test scores are
associated with those of other accepted tests that measure the same
ability. Criterion validity is often estimated statistically. For example,
738

a Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient based on the
scores on a new body fat assessment device and those from dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry would provide a measure of the
concurrent validity of the new test.
Predictive validity is the extent to which the test score
corresponds with future behavior or performance. This can be
measured through comparison of a test score with some measure of
success in the sport itself. For example, one could calculate the
statistical correlation between the overall score on a battery of tests
used to assess potential for basketball and a measurement of actual
basketball performance as indicated by a composite of such
quantities as points scored, rebounds, assists, blocked shots, forced
turnovers, and steals.
Reliability
Reliability is a measure of the degree of consistency or
repeatability of a test (2, 8). If an athlete whose ability does not
change is measured two times and achieves the same score, the test
is perfectly reliable. With an unreliable test, an individual could
obtain a high score on one day and a low score on another. A test
must be reliable to be valid, because highly variable results have
little meaning. However, even a reliable test may not be valid,
because the test may not measure what it is supposed to measure.
For example, both the 60-meter (66 yard) sprint and the 1.5-mile
(2.4 km) run are reliable field tests, but only the 1.5-mile run is
considered a valid field test for aerobic fitness. It is also possible for
a test to be highly reliable for one group (e.g., college tennis
players) but only moderately reliable for another group (e.g., grade
school tennis players) because of differences in physical or emotional
maturity and skill level, which can affect test performance.
There are several ways to determine the reliability of a test; the
most obvious one is to administer the same test several times to the
same group of athletes. Statistical correlation, such as the
intraclass-correlation coefficient, of the scores from two test
739

administrations provides a measure of test–retest reliability. Any
difference between the two sets of scores represents measurement
error. Another statistic that can be calculated is the typical error of
measurement (TE), which includes both the equipment error and
biological variation of athletes (18). The difference between two sets
of scores can arise from a number of different factors (2):
Intrasubject (within subjects) variability
Lack of interrater (between raters) reliability or agreement
Intrarater (within raters) variability
Failure of the test itself to provide consistent results
Reliability is a measure of the degree of consistency or
repeatability of a test. A test must be reliable to be
valid, because highly variable results have little
meaning.
Intrasubject variability is a lack of consistent performance by
the person being tested. Interrater reliability, also referred to as
objectivity or interrater agreement (2), is the degree to which
different raters agree in their test results over time or on repeated
occasions; it is a measure of consistency. A clearly defined scoring
system and competent scorers who are trained and experienced with
the test are essential to enhance interrater reliability. For example,
even a test that appears simple, such as timing a 40-yard (37 m)
sprint with a stopwatch, can exhibit both random and systematic
error if the timer is not trained and experienced. Sprint times
obtained using handheld stopwatches are typically shorter than
those obtained using automatic timers, because raters using
stopwatches exhibit reaction-time delay when pressing the start
button in response to the gun but do not delay in pressing the
button at the finish line because they can see the athlete
approaching. Interrater reliability is particularly important if different
scorers administer tests to different subgroups of athletes. A
subgroup with a relatively lenient scorer will have artificially inflated
740

scores. To get an accurate measure of improvement, the same
scorer should test a group at the beginning and the end of the
training period. If there are two scorers and the scorer at the
beginning is more or less lenient than the scorer at the end, the
resulting measurements may be worthless for comparative purposes.
Consider a situation in which an athlete is tested in the squat. If the
pretest scorer is more lenient (requiring less depth on the squat)
than the posttest scorer, the athlete may achieve a lower test score
on the posttest despite having made a significant improvement in
strength.
Sources of interrater differences include variations in calibrating
testing devices, preparing athletes, and running the test. Different
testers may motivate athletes to different degrees, based on factors
such as personality, status, physical appearance, demeanor, and sex.
A common scenario that increases interrater variability occurs when
the strength and conditioning professional tests some of the athletes
while an assistant tests others. The athletes may be inspired to do
better on the tests administered by the strength and conditioning
professional.
The Scientific Process
Strength and conditioning professionals should establish a sound scientific process
when it comes to selecting, administering, interpreting, and applying physical tests
with their athletes. The scientific process of testing should begin with identifying
clear questions that physical testing can answer, based on observations specific to
the context of the athlete and his or her sport. Without establishing clear questions
(the rationale) for physical testing, there is a risk of testing athletes for the sake of
it, which is both inefficient and potentially unethical. A proposed framework for
scientific process of physical test selection, with an example of a common
performance question, is shown in figure 13.1.
741

Figure 13.1 A proposed framework for the scientific process of physical test
selection.
Intrarater variability is the lack of consistent scores by a given
tester. This differs from interrater reliability, which refers to the
degree of agreement between different testers. For example, a
strength and conditioning professional eager to see improvement
may unintentionally be more lenient on a posttest than on a pretest.
Other causes of intrarater variability include inadequate training;
inattentiveness; lack of concentration; or failure to follow
standardized procedures for device calibration, athlete preparation,
test administration, or test scoring. To avoid such problems, accurate
and consistent athletic testing should be a priority for all strength
and conditioning professionals.
Finally, sometimes the test itself might fail to provide consistent
results. This may occur if a physical performance test requires a
technique in which the athlete has not developed consistency. More
technique-intensive tests generally exhibit greater variability in
results and require more pretest practice to produce consistency.
742

Test Selection
When evaluating tests for high levels of validity and reliability, the
strength and conditioning professional must rely on her or his
knowledge and practical experience with the sport. The strength and
conditioning professional must consider sport specificity (e.g.,
metabolic energy systems, biomechanical movement patterns),
athlete experience, training status, age, and environmental factors
when selecting tests.
When considering test selection, it is imperative to classify the
exercises to be tested. The categorization of exercises facilitates the
creation of a comprehensive testing battery that accurately evaluates
an athlete’s capabilities across various movement patterns and
muscle groups. Understanding the classification system assists
strength and conditioning professionals in designing targeted
training programs tailored to individual needs and goals. The
classification of exercises for assessment typically encompasses
several key dimensions of specificity:
Movement patterns. Exercises can be classified based on the
primary movement patterns they involve, such as pushing,
pulling, squatting, hinging, rotating, and stabilizing (7, 8). Each
movement 
pattern 
places 
specific 
demands 
on 
the
musculoskeletal system and requires distinct biomechanical
considerations. By including tests that cover a spectrum of
movement patterns, practitioners can obtain a complete
understanding of an athlete’s functional capabilities.
Muscle groups targeted. Another crucial dimension for
classification is the muscle groups targeted during an exercise.
This classification helps identify potential muscle imbalances or
weaknesses that may predispose athletes to injury or limit
their performance.
Primary energy system. Exercises can also be categorized
based on the primary energy system they predominantly
743

engage, such as the phosphagen system, glycolytic system, or
oxidative system. Different energy systems contribute to
various aspects of athletic performance, including power,
strength, and endurance. Assessing performance across these
energy systems provides valuable insights into an athlete’s
metabolic capacity and helps tailor conditioning strategies
accordingly.
Skill level and complexity. Exercise classification should also
consider the skill level and complexity involved in performing a
particular movement. Basic compound movements like squats,
deadlifts, and presses may serve as foundational tests for
assessing general strength and movement proficiency.
Conversely, more advanced or sport-specific movements
require greater neuromuscular coordination and may be
included to evaluate athletic prowess in specific contexts.
By 
systematically 
categorizing 
exercises 
based 
on 
these
dimensions, strength and conditioning professionals can construct a
targeted testing battery that effectively evaluates an athlete’s
strength, 
power, 
endurance, 
and 
movement 
quality. 
This
comprehensive approach not only identifies areas of improvement
but also guides the development of evidence-based training
programs aimed at optimizing athletic performance and reducing the
risk of injury. Table 13.1 details common tests used to assess
physical characteristics of various sports.
Metabolic Energy System Specificity
A valid test must emulate the energy requirements of the sport for
which ability is being assessed. Thus, the strength and conditioning
professional should have a thorough understanding of the basic
energy systems (phosphagen, glycolytic, and oxidative) and their
interrelationships in order to apply the principle of specificity when
choosing or designing valid tests to measure athletic ability for
specific sports (10, 13, 19, 36). For example, in choosing an
appropriate test for running ability in basketball, the strength and
744

conditioning professional must understand that basketball is
predominantly an anaerobic running sport (4, 26) and also be
familiar with the distances and directions of sprints in a basketball
game. It is best for the tests to simulate the physical movements
and energy demands of a real game.
TABLE 13.1 Common Tests Used to Assess Physical
Characteristics of Various Sports
Physical
characteristic
Test name
Sport
application
examples
Description
Aerobic capacity
Yo-Yo intermittent
recovery test
Soccer, hockey
Measures aerobic fitness and
ability to recover between bouts
of high-intensity exercise
V̇O2max test
Aerobic
endurance
sports
Measures maximum oxygen
uptake during incremental
exercise, indicating aerobic
endurance capacity
Agility
T-test
Soccer,
basketball,
American
football
Assesses agility by measuring
the time taken to navigate a T-
shaped course
Illinois test
Soccer, rugby,
American
football
Measures agility and speed by
timing the performance through
a set course with changes of
direction
Anaerobic
capacity
Wingate anaerobic
test
Cycling, hockey
Assesses anaerobic power and
capacity by measuring power
output on a cycle ergometer
over 30 s
Anthropometry
Height, body mass,
arm span,
circumferences, and
limb lengths
General
Measures the dimensions and
proportions of the human body
Balance and
stability
Balance error
scoring system
(BESS)
General
Assesses static balance by
counting errors during six 20-s
stance conditions performed on
firm and foam surfaces, with
745

Physical
characteristic
Test name
Sport
application
examples
Description
errors including opening eyes,
lifting hands from hips, stepping
or stumbling, or moving from
the test position
Star excursion
balance test (SEBT)
General
Evaluates dynamic balance and
neuromuscular control by
having individuals maintain
single-leg stance while reaching
with their free leg in eight
different directions arranged in
a star pattern, measuring their
maximum reach distance in
each direction
Body
composition
Air displacement
plethysmography
General
Measures body composition by
calculating body volume and
density through the
displacement of air in a sealed
chamber (e.g., the Bod Pod
device)
Bioelectrical
impedance
General
Estimates body fat by
measuring the resistance to a
small electrical current passed
through the body
Dual X-ray
absorptiometry
(DXA)
General
Measures body composition by
using low-dose X-ray beams at
two different energy levels to
distinguish between bone, fat
tissue, and lean mass
throughout the body
Skinfolds
General
Estimates body fat percentage
by using calipers to measure
subcutaneous fat thickness at
specific sites on the body, which
are then entered into prediction
equations
Underwater
weighing
General
Measures body composition by
submerging a person in water
and using their underwater
746

Physical
characteristic
Test name
Sport
application
examples
Description
weight to calculate body density
and estimate body fat
percentage based on
Archimedes’ principle
Flexibility
Sit and reach
General
Assesses hamstring and lower
back flexibility by measuring
how far a person can reach
forward while sitting with legs
extended
Overhead squat
General
Used as a part of movement
screens to assess bilateral
mobility of hips, knees, and
ankles along with shoulder and
thoracic spine
Muscular
endurance
Plank
General
Measures core strength and
endurance by maintaining a
plank position for as long as
possible
Push-up
General
Measures upper body muscular
endurance by completing as
many repetitions as possible in
a certain time or to the point of
exhaustion
Maximum
muscular power
Vertical jump
Basketball,
volleyball,
American
football
Measures lower body explosive
power by the height achieved in
a vertical jump
Standing long jump
Track and field,
American
football
Measures horizontal explosive
power by the distance jumped
from a standing position
1RM power clean
Weightlifting,
track and field,
rugby, American
football
Assesses the maximum weight
that can be lifted during the
power clean exercise
Maximum
muscular
1RM for the upper
body (e.g., bench
American
football, rugby,
Measures maximal upper body
strength by determining the
747

Physical
characteristic
Test name
Sport
application
examples
Description
strength
press or bench pull)
powerlifting
maximum weight that can be
lifted once
1RM for the lower
body (e.g., back
squat, front squat,
deadlift)
American
football, rugby,
powerlifting
Measures maximal lower body
strength by determining the
maximum weight that can be
lifted once
Isometric mid-thigh
pull
Weightlifting,
track and field,
American
football, rugby
Assesses maximal isometric
strength by pulling on an
immovable bar
Speed
40-yard (37 m)
sprint
American
football, rugby
Measures sprinting speed over a
specific distance
Biomechanical Movement Pattern
Specificity
All else being equal, the more similar the test is to an important
movement in the sport, the better. Sports differ in their physical
demands. For example, the vertical jump test is very specific to
basketball and volleyball, both of which involve vertical jumping
during play, but less relevant to hockey, which does not involve
vertical jumping. Positions within a sport differ as well. An American
football defensive lineman needs pushing strength to move opposing
linemen out of the way and 5- to 15-yard (5 to 14 m) sprint speed to
reach the opposing quarterback, while a wide receiver depends less
on pushing strength but must be able to sprint 30 to 100 yards (27-
91 m) quickly. Thus, the bench press and 10-yard (9 m) sprint test
would be more relevant to the lineman, while sprint tests of 30 to
100 yards (27-91 m) would be more relevant to the wide receiver.
For a test to be valid, it must emulate the energy
requirements and important movements of the sport for
which ability is being tested.
748

Experience and Training Status
For a well-trained, experienced athlete, a technique-intensive test
may be appropriate because it can be very sport specific, and one
can assume that poor technique will not impair performance of the
test. However, this assumption cannot be made for an athlete just
learning or trying out for a sport. The number of single-leg hops
needed to travel 27 yards (25 m) may represent a valid and reliable
test of plyometric strength for an experienced long jumper but not
for a novice (11).
Testers must also consider the training status of the athletes
being tested. It would not be ideal, for example, to ask a baseball
player to perform a 3-mile (4.8 km) run test a week before the
beginning of fall practice, because the player has probably been
doing interval training and relatively short runs (32). A lower body
strength test using the parallel squat would not be an ideal test for
an athlete who has trained using the leg press exclusively.
Age and Sex
Both age and sex can affect the validity and reliability of a test. For
example, the 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run may be a valid and reliable field
test of aerobic power for college-aged men and women (21) but
may not be appropriate for preadolescents because of their probable
lack of experience and interest in sustained running (30). A test of
the maximum number of chin-ups that can be performed may be a
valid test of elbow flexion muscular endurance for male wrestlers,
but it may not be as valid for females due to differences in upper
body pulling strength (27). The test may not be capable of
differentiating muscular endurance levels in females. Therefore,
using a modified prone pull-up with the feet supported may be a
more valid test.
Environmental Factors
It is necessary to consider the environment when selecting and
administering 
tests 
of 
basic 
athletic 
ability. 
High 
ambient
749

temperature, especially in combination with high humidity, can
impair endurance exercise performance, pose health risks, and lower
the validity of an aerobic endurance exercise test. Aerobic endurance
performance (29, 35) and intermittent sprint performance (17) may
be impaired when the temperature approaches 80 °F (27 °C),
especially if the humidity exceeds 50% (20). The effects of
temperature and humidity on testing performance can create
problems for comparing the results of tests administered at different
times of year, on different days, and even at different times of day.
For example, the maximal oxygen uptake of an athlete impaired by
the heat is underestimated by the 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run test. Run
times can also be impaired by cold temperatures. Thus, outdoor
aerobic endurance tests may be inappropriate at locations
characterized by wide fluctuations in temperature. In such places,
aerobic endurance tests can be administered on an indoor track, if
available, or with a treadmill or stationary cycle.
Altitude can also impair performance on aerobic endurance tests,
although not on tests of strength and power (24). Norms on aerobic
endurance tests should be adjusted when testing at altitudes
exceeding 1,900 feet (579 m). Up to about 9,000 feet (2,743 m),
maximal oxygen uptake declines by approximately 5% for each
3,000 feet (914 m) of elevation (25). At even higher altitudes,
maximal oxygen uptake declines more sharply. Athletes who arrive
at a relatively high altitude after living near sea level for an extended
period of time should be given at least 10 days to acclimate before
undergoing aerobic endurance tests (34). For all testing, it is good
practice to measure and document the environmental conditions and
then to consider these factors when interpreting the results.
Athletes’ experience, training status, age, and sex can
affect test performance, so these factors should be
considered in test selection. Environmental factors such
as temperature, humidity, and altitude can also
influence test performance, so testers should try to
750

standardize environmental conditions as much as
possible.
751

Test Administration
To achieve accurate test results, tests must be administered safely,
correctly, and in an organized manner. Strength and conditioning
professionals should ensure the health and safety of athletes; testers
should be carefully selected and trained; tests should be well
organized and administered efficiently; and athletes should be
properly prepared and instructed.
Health and Safety Considerations
Even though all athletes should be medically cleared before being
permitted to physically train and compete, the strength and
conditioning professional must be aware of testing conditions that
can threaten the health of athletes and be observant of signs and
symptoms of health problems that warrant exclusion from testing
(5). The strength and conditioning professional must remain
attentive to the health status of athletes, especially before, during,
and after maximal exertions that occur during training, testing, and
competition. Strenuous exercise, such as maximal runs or 1-
repetition maximum (1RM) tests, can uncover or worsen existing
heart problems, such as impaired blood flow to the heart muscle and
irregular heartbeats. Standard medical screening cannot always
reveal hidden heart problems, which occasionally result in fatality
among young athletes (30). Heat injury is also a risk during heavy
physical exertion in hot environments, especially when humidity is
high. Athletes should wear light clothing in warm weather and drink
water ad libitum according to the dictates of thirst before and during
heavy physical exertion in the heat (refer to chapters 10 and 11 for
more detailed hydration guidelines). Musculoskeletal injuries can also
be a problem. If symptoms are ignored, recovery can be greatly
delayed.
Medical referral may be warranted for an athlete who persistently
has any of the following symptoms: chest pressure, pain, or
discomfort; listlessness; light-headedness; dizziness; confusion;
752

headache; deeply reddened or cold and clammy skin; irregular
pulse; bone or joint pain; blurred vision; nausea; or shortness of
breath, rapid pulse, or weakness either not commensurate with the
level of exertion or unresponsive to rest. Such symptoms can occur
long after exercise is terminated. Even symptoms that occur only
once, if severe (such as loss of consciousness), call for immediate
medical attention.
When aerobic endurance exercise tests are being administered in
a hot environment, caution must be observed to protect both the
health and safety of the athlete and the validity of the test. Figure
13.2 lists temperature limits at various ranges of relative humidity for
strenuous exercise testing, and the sidebar lists guidelines for
aerobic endurance testing in the heat.
FIGURE 13.2 Temperature limits at various ranges of relative humidity for strenuous
exercise testing.
Data from McArdle et al. (2023).
Aerobic Endurance Testing in the Heat
Follow these guidelines to minimize health risks and obtain accurate results when
testing athletes in hot environments (9, 23, 30):
753

During the weeks before the test, athletes should engage in enough training
to establish a baseline of fitness in the activity being tested. Strength and
conditioning professionals should be aware that responses to exercise in the
heat are highly individual.
Avoid testing under extreme combinations of heat and humidity. Figure 13.2
illustrates the combinations of temperature and humidity at which heat injury
risk is present.
Using temperature limits of at least 5 °F (3 °C) below those listed is
recommended, especially on sunny days, to provide a safety margin and
enable better test performance. On days when the temperature has exceeded
or is expected to exceed the recommended limits, indoor facilities should be
used if available, or testing should be conducted during morning or early
evening hours when temperatures are acceptable.
The athletes, especially those coming from cool climates, should be
acclimated to the heat and humidity for at least one week before testing.
Start with short workouts and progress to workouts of longer duration.
Athletes should make sure they are well hydrated in the 24-hour period
preceding aerobic endurance testing in the heat. A good indication of
adequate hydration is a plentiful volume of clear urine (refer to chapter 10 for
more detailed preexercise hydration guidelines). Salt tablets should generally
be avoided.
Athletes should be encouraged to drink during exercise in the heat. Plain
water is most appropriate for exercise up to 1 hour in duration. Snack breaks
during longer durations of training can help replenish fluids and be important
in replacing electrolytes. The amount and rate of fluid replacement depend
on individual sweat rates, duration of exercise, and environment. Refer to
chapter 10 for specific guidelines and how to calculate sweat rate if needed.
Athletes should wear a light-colored, loose-fitting tank top and shorts that are
breathable (i.e., synthetic porous, moisture-wicking material). Male athletes
may be allowed to go shirtless.
Heart rate may be monitored to detect reactions to the heat.
Be attentive to possible symptoms of heatstroke or heat exhaustion: cramps,
nausea, dizziness, difficulty in walking or standing, faintness, garbled speech,
lack of sweat, red or ashen skin, and goose bumps.
Be aware of the symptoms of hyponatremia or water intoxication, a
potentially fatal condition in which excess water intake reduces blood sodium
to dangerously low levels. Symptoms may include extremely diluted urine in
combination with bloated skin, altered consciousness, or loss of
consciousness, with no increase in body temperature. A victim of
hyponatremia should never be given fluid and should be treated by a
physician.
Proficient medical coverage should be readily available so that an athlete
encountering a test-related health problem can be very rapidly treated or
754

evacuated (or both).
Selection and Training of Testers
Test administrators should be well trained and should have a
thorough understanding of all testing procedures and protocols. The
testing supervisor should make sure that all novice personnel
perform and score all tests correctly, as in timing sprint speed with a
stopwatch or determining a 1RM back squat. It is essential that all
testers have sufficient practice so that the scores they obtain
correlate closely with those produced by experienced and reliable
personnel. The testers should be trained to explain and administer
the tests as consistently as possible. Test reliability is impaired, for
example, if one test administrator provides considerable verbal
encouragement to a group of athletes while another tester provides
no verbal encouragement to another group. Administrators should
have a checklist of materials needed for testing and written test
protocols to refer to if questions arise during the testing process.
Recording Forms
Scoring forms, whether paper based or digital, should be developed
before the testing session and should have space for all test results
and comments. Factors such as environmental conditions should be
documented. The specific details of setup for the testing should also
be noted. For example, for a 1RM squat, the tester can note the pin
height that was used for the barbell. This allows test time to be used
more efficiently and reduces the incidence of recording errors.
Test Format
A well-organized testing session, in which the athletes are aware of
the purpose and procedures of the testing, will enhance the
reliability of test measures. Reliable measures obtained from valid
tests are a great asset in assessing fitness levels and evaluating
changes over a period of time.
755

Test planning must address such issues as whether athletes will
be tested all at once or in groups and whether the same person will
administer a given test to all athletes. The main consideration here is
the number of athletes that are being tested. It is preferable to have
the same person administer a given test if time and schedules
permit, because this eliminates the issue of interrater reliability. If
this is not feasible, the test supervisor can allow simple, well-defined
tests (e.g., counting correct push-ups) to be administered by
different testers and tests requiring schooled judgment (as of proper
form in the squat) to be scored by the most skilled and experienced
personnel. As a rule, each tester should administer only one test at a
time, especially when the tests require complex judgments. It is
permissible to have one tester alternate between two testing
stations to avoid wasting time as athletes get ready. However, the
tester must focus on only one test at a time. Planning and practicing
the testing sessions beforehand will go a long way toward ensuring
an efficiently run testing session.
Testing Batteries and Multiple Testing
Trials
When time is limited and the group of athletes is large, duplicate
test setups may be employed to make efficient use of testing time.
For example, when one is conducting the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
two test courses can be set up (16). A tester can administer up to
two nonfatiguing tests in sequence to an athlete as long as test
reliability can be maintained. For example, at a two-test lower body
power station staffed by only one tester, the athlete can perform the
vertical jump test and the static jump test immediately afterward.
When multiple trials of a test (e.g., the repeated trials it takes to
find a 1RM) or a battery of tests is performed, allow complete
recovery between trials (31). There should be at least 2 minutes of
rest between attempts that are not close to the athlete’s maximum
and 3 minutes between attempts that are close to the maximum, as
judged by the relative difficulty of the previous trial or testing set
756

(21). When administering a test battery (e.g., one in which
wrestlers perform maximal repetition pull-up and push-up tests for
assessment of local muscular endurance), tests should be separated
by at least 5 minutes to prevent the effects of fatigue from
confounding test results (also see the following section, Sequence of
Tests).
Sequence of Tests
Knowledge of exercise science can help determine the proper order
of tests and the duration of rest periods between tests to ensure test
reliability. The fundamental principle with test sequencing should be
that one test should not affect the performance of a subsequent
test. This should allow for optimal performance in each test and also
allows for valid comparisons with previous testing results. For
example, a test that maximally taxes the phosphagen energy system
requires 3 to 5 minutes of rest for complete recovery (6, 12),
whereas a maximal test of the anaerobic glycolytic energy system
requires at least 1 hour for complete recovery (10). Therefore, tests
requiring high-skill movements, such as agility tests, should be
administered before tests that are likely to produce fatigue and
confound the results of subsequent tests. A logical sequence,
although there are some variations, is to administer tests in this
order:
1. Nonfatiguing tests (e.g., height, weight, flexibility, skinfolds
and girth measurements, vertical jump)
2. Agility tests (e.g., T-test, 5-10-5 test, 5-0-5 test, Illinois test)
3. Maximum power and strength tests (e.g., 1RM power clean,
1RM squat, 1RM bench press)
4. Sprint tests (e.g., 40 m sprint with split times at 10 m and 20
m)
5. Local muscular endurance tests (e.g., push-up test, partial
curl-up, YMCA bench press test)
757

6. Fatiguing anaerobic capacity tests (e.g., 300-yard [274 m]
shuttle, 90 s box hop test)
7. Aerobic capacity tests (e.g., 1.5-mile [2.4 km] run, 12-minute
run test, Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test, maximal aerobic
speed test, and 30-15 intermittent fitness test)
The test order should also be designed to require minimal
recovery time between tests, allowing for a more efficient testing
session. An effort should be made to administer fatiguing anaerobic
capacity tests and aerobic tests on a different day than the other
tests. However, if performed on the same day, these tests should be
performed last, after an extended rest period.
It is important that test sessions be conducted at the same time
of day to avoid fluctuations in physiological responses due to
differences in circadian rhythm (33). It is also recommended that
tests be conducted indoors, which will allow for climate and testing
surfaces to remain more consistent.
The order of tests should be designed in such a way that
the completion of one test does not adversely affect
performance in subsequent tests.
Preparing Athletes for Testing
The date, time, and purpose of a test battery should be announced
in advance to allow athletes to prepare physically and mentally. To
maximize test reliability, athletes should be familiar with test content
and procedures. Athletes should also be in a state of readiness to
perform. Athlete readiness has been defined as “the state of being
fully prepared to train and perform physically and mentally” (3). A
short, supervised pretest practice or familiarization session one to
three days before the test, in which the athletes exert themselves at
somewhat less than full intensity, is often beneficial for athletes who
either have never participated in the test before or have not done so
for a long time. One strategy to promote test familiarization among
758

athletes could be to incorporate familiarization of the tests into
preceding training sessions, even if only as part of their dynamic
warm-up.
The instructions should cover the purpose of the test, how it is to
be performed, the amount of warm-up recommended, the number
of practice attempts allowed, the number of trials, test scoring,
criteria for disallowing attempts, and recommendations for
maximizing performance. The instructions that are given to the
athletes need to be clear and concise because this will increase the
reliability and objectivity of the test (25).
As an important supplement to reading test instructions aloud,
the test administrator or a competent assistant should demonstrate
proper test performance when possible. The athletes should be
given opportunities to ask questions before and after the
demonstration. The test administrator should anticipate questions
and have answers prepared. It is important to motivate all athletes
equally rather than giving special encouragement to only some.
Whenever possible, tell athletes their test scores immediately after
each trial to motivate them to perform better on subsequent trials
(2).
Reliability of testing improves with pretest warm-up (2). An
appropriately organized warm-up consists of a general warm-up
followed by a specific warm-up. Both types of warm-ups include
body movements similar to those involved in the test. An organized,
instructor-led general warm-up ensures uniformity. It is acceptable
to allow two or three activity-specific warm-up trials, depending on
the test protocol, and have subsequent trials actually count toward
the score. Depending on the test protocol, the score can be the best
or the average of the post-warm-up trials (2).
General and specific warm-ups performed before a test
can increase the test’s reliability.
759

Administer a supervised cool-down period to athletes following
tests that dramatically increase heart rate and at the completion of
the test battery. For example, after the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
the athlete should not sit or lie down; active recovery using low-
intensity movement and light stretching will enhance the recovery
process (10).
760

Conclusion
Tests and measurements can be used to assess athletic talent,
identify physical capacities in need of improvement, provide
reference values to evaluate the effectiveness of a training program,
and set realistic training goals. To optimize test quality, testers must
understand and consider validity and reliability. Test selection
involves consideration of the physiological energy systems required
by the sport; movement specificity; and the athletes’ experience,
training status, age, and sex. Testers must also consider
environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, and altitude
before administering tests. Strength and conditioning professionals
must always remain conscious of potential health risks during testing
and attentive to signs and symptoms of possible health problems
that require medical referral. Testers must be carefully selected and
well trained, and the testing session must be well planned and
organized using the appropriate testing sequence. Consistent and
effective preparation of athletes for testing is essential.
KEY TERMS
concurrent validity
construct validity
content validity
convergent validity
criterion validity
discriminant validity
evaluation
face validity
field test
formative evaluation
interrater agreement
interrater reliability
intraclass-correlation coefficient
761

intrarater variability
intrasubject variability
measurement
midtest
monitoring
objectivity
posttest
predictive validity
pretest
readiness
reliability
talent identification
test
test battery
test–retest reliability
typical error of measurement
validity
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Regular assessment through evidence-based testing is
important for monitoring progress in athletes because of which
of the following reasons?
  a.  It ensures the athlete maintains a consistent training
routine.
  b.  It provides subjective feedback from the athlete about
their feelings.
  c.  It allows coaches to track changes and make data-driven
program modification.
  d.  It guarantees immediate improvement in athletic
performance.
  2.  Reliability is crucial in test selection because it ensures that
the test does which of the following?
  a.  creates a challenge for the athlete
762

  b.  produces consistent results over multiple trials
  c.  provides a way to quickly administer the test
  d.  reduces the expense of the test
  3.  Which of the following tests is most appropriate for assessing
aerobic endurance in a soccer player?
  a.  1RM bench press
  b.  40-yard sprint
  c.  V̇O2max test
  d.  vertical jump
  4.  When assessing the validity of a test, which aspect is the most
critical?
  a.  ability to be repeated consistently
  b.  alignment with the sport-specific demands
  c.  affordability and ease of implementation
  d.  capacity to accommodate large groups
  5.  To evaluate an athlete’s lower body power, which of the
following tests would most accurately provide valid results for
this purpose?
  a.  T-test
  b.  vertical jump
  c.  40-yard sprint
  d.  1RM deadlift
763
