CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATION, SCORING, AND
INTERPRETATION OF SELECTED TESTS
David J. Heikkinen, PhD, Jo Clubb, MS, and John McMahon, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Michael McGuigan, Everett Harman, and John Garhammer
to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discern the best ways to measure selected parameters related to athletic performance;
administer field tests appropriately;
evaluate and analyze test data and make normative comparisons;
understand appropriate statistics; and
combine the results of selected tests to generate an athletic profile.
As discussed in chapter 13, the strength and conditioning professional—often referred to as the
tester in this chapter—who has a broad understanding of exercise science can effectively choose
and use tests and measurements to make training program decisions that help athletes optimize
their physical preparation and maximize their potential. To do this effectively, the tester must
administer tests correctly, analyze test data accurately (or understand how test data have been
analyzed if the tester is not responsible for this, such as when using proprietary software), and then
combine the results of selected tests to generate an athletic profile. This chapter covers these basic
aspects of testing performance-related parameters and provides comprehensive age- and sport-
specific descriptive and normative data for selected tests.
764

Measuring Parameters of Athletic Performance
Athleticism incorporates many physical abilities, some of which are much more amenable to training
than others. Such abilities may be called general components of athletic performance—that is,
abilities that enable effective responses to the various physical demands of a specific sport or
event. This section focuses on how each component can be tested and highlights relevant issues.
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
Maximum muscular strength tests can be split into dynamic or isometric demands; those that
involve relatively low movement speeds reflect low-speed muscular strength. In this case,
muscular strength is related to the force a muscle or muscle group can exert in one maximal effort
while maintaining proper form, and it can be quantified by the maximum weight that can be lifted
once (the 1-repetition maximum [1RM]) in exercises such as the bench press or back squat, or the
maximum force that can be exerted at a particular isokinetic velocity (5, 6, 45, 72, 100, 101, 103,
109, 124). Because 1RM tests do not require expensive equipment and reflect the kind of dynamic
ability necessary in sport, they are the maximal strength tests of choice for most strength and
conditioning professionals.
In general, 1RM tests are administered after the athlete has warmed up by performing a few
sets of the test exercise with submaximal loads, beginning with a relatively light load. The first
attempt is usually with approximately 50% of the athlete’s estimated 1RM weight. After the athlete
has rested enough to feel recovered from the previous attempt (1-5 min, depending on the
difficulty of the attempt), the strength and conditioning professional increases the weight
somewhat, based on the ease with which the previous trial was performed. A skilled strength and
conditioning professional should, within three to five attempts following warm-up, be able to find
the athlete’s 1RM load to within a few percentage points of the true value.
While testing the athlete’s 1RM is a time-tested and reliable way to assess maximal strength,
many strength and conditioning professionals have begun to use isometric tests to more
comprehensively assess the athlete’s maximal force production capacities (5, 6, 19, 29, 45, 72, 100,
101, 103, 124). These types of tests are particularly appealing because they are nonfatiguing and
are often integrated into an athlete’s regular training program (i.e., training is testing). Typically
administered with the use of a force plate (or pair of force plates) or force cell that is integrated
into a custom testing device, these tests allow for the generation of a force–time curve that can be
used to quantify the rate at which force is produced as well as the maximum force exerted against
an immovable object (e.g., bar) (29, 92). Regardless of the isometric testing device used, these
tests are performed after a suitable warm-up, often progressing from 50% effort to 90% before
performing three maximum isometric trials that are performed for 3- to 5-second duration (29, 59).
Given that strength is highly influenced by body mass, expressing maximum muscular strength
test results relative to body weight is valuable. Ratio standards can be used to determine relative
strength (43) by dividing the weight lifted (in a dynamic test) or force produced (in an isometric
test) by the athlete’s body weight. Relative strength from a 1RM test can be expressed as the total
weight lifted (lb or kg) divided by body mass (lb or kg). To express the same from an isometric test,
maximal force exerted in newtons is divided by bodyweight converted into newtons (lb × 4.44, or
kg × 9.81). Ratio scaling allows comparisons between athletes normalized to body weight.
However, this simple approach assumes that strength is directly proportional to body mass (43),
which is not necessarily the case. Therefore, allometric scaling has also been recommended,
particularly in settings with wide variation in body size and strength. Dividing strength by body
mass raised to an appropriate power can eliminate the effects of body mass, although debate
remains regarding the most appropriate scaling exponents (33, 43, 83).
765

Anaerobic or Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed
Strength)
High-speed muscular strength or maximal anaerobic muscular power (or anaerobic
power) is related to the ability of muscle tissue to exert high force while contracting at a high
speed. Tests of strength and power are of very short duration, are performed at maximal
movement speeds, and produce very high-power outputs. High-speed maximal muscular power
tests are often called (maximal) anaerobic power tests. Scores on high-speed muscular strength
tests include the 1RM of explosive exercises (e.g., the power clean, snatch, push jerk), the height
of a vertical jump, and the time to sprint up a staircase (e.g., Margaria-Kalamen test) (69, 100, 103,
124, 126). Because explosive exercise tests take about 1 second while low-speed maximal strength
tests generally require 2 to 5 seconds to complete, phosphocreatine and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) stored in the active muscle(s) are the primary energy sources for both types of tests.
Maintaining correct technique or form is also important when measuring anaerobic power for both
performance validity and safety reasons.
Most maximal muscular strength tests involve relatively slow movement speeds
and therefore reflect low-speed strength. Assessment of high-speed muscular
strength can involve measuring the 1RM of explosive resistance training exercises
or the height of a vertical jump.
Power output reflects the interplay between force and velocity. The height of a jump is a function
of the force applied to the ground that is greater than the athlete’s body weight over the time it
was applied (this is referred to as net impulse) while he or she extends the ankles, knees, and hips
to propel upward. A larger net impulse (force × time) leads to a higher velocity at which the athlete
leaves the ground. An athlete may not improve in jump height after gaining body weight during a
resistance training cycle, making it appear that power output is unchanged. However, because the
athlete is heavier and propels the body to the same height, indicating the same takeoff velocity, an
increase in power output is likely. This applies to any test in which body weight is manipulated
(e.g., running up stairs). Moving a heavier body at the same speed requires a higher power output.
It is up to the strength and conditioning professional to interpret the interplay between changes in
body weight, velocity, and power output accordingly, because for some athletes, such as those from
collision-based sports, gains in absolute power through weight gain may be beneficial, but for
athletes who benefit primarily from moving at high absolute velocities, a reduction in velocity owing
to weight gain may be detrimental.
An alternative class of anaerobic power tests involves the use of a cycle ergometer. This type of
test can be advantageous for the strength and conditioning professional in some injury situations in
which running is restricted or when the athlete participates in a non-bodyweight-support sport such
as rowing or cycling. The most commonly used test of this type is the Wingate anaerobic test. A
field test protocol involves use of a cycle ergometer with mechanical means of adjusting resistance
and measuring pedal revolutions (i.e., revolutions per second). In a laboratory setting, an
electronically instrumented ergometer can simplify parameter measurement and improve accuracy.
Typical protocols involve a basic warm-up followed by a 30-second test interval (39). In this test,
resistance is applied quickly after the individual reaches a near-maximal pedaling rate (typically 90-
110 rpm). The resistance applied is proportional to body weight (e.g., 7.5%); the percentage is
greater for trained athletes than for individuals with less training. Work performed is determined
from the resistance value and number of pedal revolutions. Power is generally calculated as work
divided by time for each 5-second time interval during the 30-second test. Parameters typically
766

calculated include peak power, average power, and a fatigue index such as a ratio of maximum to
minimum interval power. Norms for cycle ergometer tests are available (71, 103).
Load-Velocity Profile
Velocity-based training (VBT) using commercially available technology has become an increasingly
popular method for measuring bar speed and displacement during the performance of individual
resistance training exercises. These technologies allow testers to measure the intensity of an
exercise using bar velocity as a metric rather than simply using percentages of a 1RM (15, 156).
These methods are based on the inverse relationship between bar speed and the weight lifted.
Specifically, as the absolute weight on the bar increases, a linear decrease in bar velocity is typically
recorded. Using this knowledge, strength and conditioning professionals can create an
individualized load–velocity profile by performing a series of sets performed with progressively
increasing loads (i.e., 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 90% of 1RM) (156). The creation of the load–
velocity profile has been suggested to be useful for evaluating and prescribing exercise intensity
during resistance training programs and has also been suggested to be a useful tool for estimating
or monitoring the 1RM. When the load–velocity profile is created from a series of increasing loads
as a percentage of the 1RM with the back squat exercise (figure 14.1) a linear relationship exists
between load and velocity (14). However, when the 1RM back squat is estimated from the load–
velocity profile, it is highly variable and consistently results in an overestimation of the athlete’s
1RM and should not be used for 1RM prediction (56, 89). When the current body of scientific
knowledge is examined using the load–velocity profile to predict the 1RM on a day-to-day basis, it
may result in the misprogramming of training loads and, in some instances, the programming of
loads that exceed the athlete’s capacities (14, 56, 60). As such, it is generally recommended that
the 1RM should be directly tested when seeking to determine an athlete’s maximal strength in a
given exercise, and the load–velocity profile should not be used to estimate the 1RM (56, 89).
Anaerobic Capacity
Anaerobic capacity is the maximal rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and
anaerobic glycolytic energy systems for moderate-duration activities. It is typically quantified as the
maximal power output during muscular activity between 30 and 90 seconds using a variety of tests
for the upper and lower body (39, 103, 124, 151), as opposed to maximal anaerobic power tests,
which last no longer than a few seconds.
Local Muscular Endurance
Local muscular endurance is the ability of certain muscles or muscle groups to perform repeated
contractions against a submaximal resistance (18, 103). A test of local muscular endurance should
be performed in a continuous manner for several seconds to several minutes without the advantage
of rest periods and without extraneous body movements. Examples include performing a maximal
number of repetitions of the chin-up, parallel bar dip, or push-up exercises or a resistance training
exercise using a fixed load (e.g., a percentage of an athlete’s 1RM or body weight) (38, 46, 94, 100,
103).
Aerobic Capacity
Aerobic capacity, also called aerobic power, is the maximum rate at which an athlete can
produce energy through oxidation of energy sources (carbohydrates, fats, and proteins) and is
usually expressed as a volume of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (i.e.,
mL · kg−1 · min−١) (95). Few strength and conditioning professionals have the equipment to
measure oxygen consumption directly, so aerobic capacity is generally estimated by performance in
aerobic endurance activities such as running 1 mile (1.6 km) or more (69, 111, 120). It can also be
767

estimated using other field tests such as the maximal aerobic speed (MAS) test (87) and the Yo-Yo
intermittent recovery test (10, 18, 85, 86).
768

769

FIGURE 14.1 Load–velocity profiling.
Reprinted by permission from H.G. Banyard, K. Nosaka, and G.G. Haff, “Reliability and Validity of the Load-Velocity Relationship to Predict the 1RM Back Squat,” The
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 31, no. 7 (2017): 1897-1904.
Agility
Agility traditionally has been considered the ability to stop, start, and change the direction of the
whole body rapidly (134, 143). Agility consists of two main components: speed in changing
direction and cognitive factors (134). The definition of agility has been revised to take into account
the perceptual qualities, and it is now considered “a rapid, whole-body, change of direction or
speed in response to a sports-specific stimulus” (134, 143). Agility testing therefore involves tests
of change of direction with a cognitive component, such an anticipation and reaction. Tests such as
the T-test, the 5-0-5 test, the 5-10-5 test (also known as the pro agility test), and the L-drill (also
known as the 3-cone drill) are used to assess change of direction.
Speed
Speed is movement distance per unit of time and is typically quantified as the time taken to cover
a fixed distance. The time taken to sprint from a stationary start over a short distance such as 10
yards or meters reflects acceleration, whereas longer sprints such as 40 yards (37 m) would
measure maximum speed (163). Tests of speed are not usually conducted over distances greater
than 100 meters (109 yd) because longer distances reflect anaerobic or aerobic capacity more than
absolute ability to move the body at maximal speed (103, 124, 163).
Electronic timing devices are becoming more accessible to strength and conditioning
professionals due to increased ease of use and lower prices. However, many tests of speed and
agility are administered using hand timing with a stopwatch, which can be a major source of
measurement error, especially if the tester is not sufficiently trained. Even under ideal conditions,
stopwatch-measured sprint times are up to 0.24 seconds faster than electronically measured times
because of the tester’s reaction-time delay in pressing the stopwatch button at the gun and the
tendency to anticipate and press the button early as the athlete approaches the finish line (45, 67,
125). Therefore, strength and conditioning professionals are encouraged to use electronic timing
devices for tests of speed and agility when they are available. It is also more informative to
measure split times, because this can provide the strength and conditioning professional with
insight into the speed and acceleration capacities of the athletes. For example, times for 10 yards
(9 m), 20 yards (18 m), and 40 yards (37 m) can be recorded and used to calculate split times and
maximal velocity. Finally, tests of speed and agility require proper footwear and a nonslip surface.
Athletic Motor Skill Competency
Developing movement skills that enable children and adolescents to move in an effective and
efficient manner during physical activity and sport is central to long-term athletic development. The
athletic motor skill competencies (AMSC), proposed by Lloyd and colleagues (90), presents
foundational movement skills that underpin athletic movements. The AMSC and examples of
associated movement screening exercises are presented in figure 14.2 and can be used to monitor
the development of young athletes (123). The use of the AMSC and other screening tools provide a
method for tracking athlete development with the use of various assessment tools that evaluate
movement patterns and other qualitative aspects of movement. As such, these types of tools are
best described as process-oriented assessments (150). Overall, the use of movement screening
information can be used by practitioners to identify strength, mobility, and neuromuscular deficits,
which can then guide programming decisions.
770

FIGURE 14.2 Athletic motor skill competencies and examples of associated movement screen exercises.
Adapted from Lloyd and Oliver (2020); Pullen et al. (2022).
Assessing movement patterns can reveal indicators of injury susceptibility in young athletes.
Well-established screening tools such as the functional movement screen (FMS), tuck jump
assessment (TJA), landing error scoring system, and drop jump assessments are commonly used
for this purpose (123). Additionally, tailored movement screening protocols have been devised
specific to particular sports, aiming to pinpoint injury risks, performance limitations, or even talent
identification opportunities. Tailored training programs can be developed by strength and
conditioning professionals to target specific individual needs, including addressing movement
limitations.
Multiple movement screens assess parts of the AMSC spectrum, but consensus has not been
reached regarding which are most appropriate for a given cohort. One narrative review (122)
included 10 movement screens, including but not limited to the FMS, TJA, resistance training skills
battery (RTSB), and back squat assessment (BSA). Interested readers are directed to the review by
Pullen and colleagues (122) for more detailed information on the methodologies, reliabilities, and
strengths and limitations of each of these tests when selecting the screening test that is the most
appropriate for the environment.
771

Implementing movement screens can be complex due to variations in implementation practices,
criteria, grading, and movement analysis. Understanding reliability of screen implementers is
critical, although both novice and expert raters can achieve substantial reliability (104). Recording
movements for retrospective analysis after testing is recommended, because it allows raters to
review video footage, pause, slow down, and rewatch to accurately assess movements. The
number of repetitions performed and how they are graded are crucial. Due to ongoing brain
maturation, youth exhibit higher movement variability, and performance regressions can coincide
with growth spurts (54, 68). Therefore, movement screens should assess each repetition for
consistency. Some screens, such as the FMS and RTSB, use a best repetition technique, which limits
the assessment of movement consistency. Others, like the TJA, use a sum-of-repetition scoring
system, capturing movement variability. Considering total body versus segmental analysis is also
important because total body approaches like the FMS may miss specific deficiencies or
compensations, whereas segmental analysis provides detailed insights (123).
Flexibility
Flexibility can be defined as the range of motion about a body joint (13). Typical devices for
measuring flexibility include manual and electric goniometers, which measure joint angle, and the
sit-and-reach box, which is used to evaluate the combined flexibility of the lower back and hips.
Flexibility measurements are more reliable when standardized warm-up and static stretching
precede the flexibility assessment. During a flexibility test, the athlete should move slowly into the
fully stretched position and hold this position. Ballistic stretching, characterized by bouncing to
increase range of motion, cannot be allowed during any flexibility testing (69, 116).
A number of movement competency screens are available for strength and conditioning
professionals and can be used to assess overall flexibility, mobility, and general movement
competency of athletes. However, there is no current consensus on which screen to use, nor a
clearly established link between movement screening results and injury (98, 116). Competent
strength and conditioning professionals perform postural and performance screening routinely by
viewing the athletes’ performance in training. For example, the overhead squat is a common
exercise that is used as a part of movement screens because it allows assessment of bilateral
mobility of the hips, knees, and ankles along with the shoulder and thoracic spine (3, 25, 126).
Balance and Stability
Balance is the ability to maintain static and dynamic equilibrium or the ability to maintain the
body’s center of gravity over its base of support (103, 124). Stability is a measure of the ability to
return to a desired position following a postural disturbance (103). Athletes with poor balance are
at a greater risk of lower limb injuries (76, 77, 96). Athletes have also been shown to have greater
balance compared to nonathletes (38). Balance testing can be used to assess stability increases
with training and in a number of different ways (103). Commonly used tests include timed static
standing tests (eyes closed and standing on one or both legs) (21, 101), balance tests using
unstable surfaces (101), and tests using specialized balance testing equipment (e.g., NeuroCom,
Biodex Balance System) (124). These include a large number of tests that can evaluate different
aspects of balance and stability (103). The balance error scoring system (BESS) and star excursion
balance test (SEBT) have very good reliability and a substantial body of literature supporting their
use (21, 57, 66, 103, 115, 146).
Body Composition
Body composition usually refers to the relative proportions by weight of fat and lean tissue.
Although there are sophisticated and expensive devices capable of partitioning the lean component
into bone and soft tissue, the body composition procedures typically performed by strength and
772

conditioning professionals use the basic two-component (fat and lean mass) model. With a trained
and competent tester, the skinfold measurement technique is the most valid and reliable (r = 0.99)
means for assessing body fatness that is generally available to the strength and conditioning
professional and is preferable to body circumference methods (95). Other methods available to
strength and conditioning professionals include bioimpedance devices and total body
plethysmography, although dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is often labeled as a gold standard.
The skinfold method uses calipers that measure the thickness of a double layer of finger-pinched
skin and subcutaneous fat. A good skinfold measurement device should squeeze the fold of skin
and fat with constant pressure regardless of the amount of tissue being measured (41, 69, 120).
Circumference methods may be added, because they are relatively quick and simple and can yield
important chronic disease risk information. For example, waist circumference can assess abdominal
fat, and a high waist circumference is associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, high
cholesterol, high blood pressure, and certain types of cardiac disease (69).
Anthropometry
Anthropometry, which is the science of measurement applied to the human body, generally
includes measurements of height, weight, and selected body girths (69). Ideally, height should be
measured with a stadiometer. If a stadiometer is not available, measurement of height requires a
flat wall against which the athlete stands, with a measuring tape attached or unattached to the
wall. Height is usually measured without shoes to the nearest quarter-inch or half-centimeter (103).
The most accurate body mass or body weight measurement is performed with a certified balance
scale, which is generally more reliable than a spring scale and should be calibrated on a regular
basis (103). A calibrated electronic scale is an acceptable alternative. Athletes should be weighed
while wearing minimal dry clothing (e.g., workout shorts and T-shirt, no shoes). For comparison
measurements at a later date, they should dress similarly and be weighed at the same time of day.
The most reliable body mass measurements are made in the morning upon rising, after elimination
and before ingestion of food or fluids. Level of hydration can result in variability of body mass
(weight). Thus, athletes should be encouraged to avoid eating salty food (which increases water
retention) the day before weighing and to go to bed normally hydrated.
The most reliable girth measurements are usually obtained with the aid of a flexible measuring
tape equipped with a spring-loaded attachment at the end that, when pulled out to a specified
mark, exerts a fixed amount of tension on the tape. Girth measurements should be made at the
beginning of a training period for comparison with subsequent measurements (69, 103).
773

Monitoring Protocols, Procedures, and Equipment
When selecting tests for athletic assessment, it is crucial to consider the protocols, procedures, and
equipment necessary to effectively implement them. Every athletic environment is unique, requiring
careful consideration to optimize these aspects for specific settings.
Protocols are systematic plans outlining guidelines to achieve specific objectives. In athlete
testing, they provide a comprehensive framework within which procedures are developed, setting
standards for consistency, reliability, and validity (as explained in detail in chapter 13). A monitoring
protocol represents the overarching strategy for conducting performance assessments, detailing the
overall approach for tracking an athlete’s physical capacities and specifying test types and
frequencies throughout the season.
Using Artificial Intelligence to Analyze Testing Data
Artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged as a potentially transformative tool in sport. Yet there is still much confusion,
apprehension, and skepticism about the value of AI. AI is defined as “the ability of a digital computer to perform tasks
commonly associated with intelligent beings … such as the ability to reason, discover meaning, generalize, or learn from
past experience” (31). Within AI, machine learning (ML) is the ability of computer machines to learn from and develop
data without human input or interaction. These approaches offer various advantages to sport, including automating or
semiautomating data collection, processing data into meaningful insights, identifying crucial information related to health
and performance, and creating models that support complex decision making (40). Such models can handle a vast number
of factors and their interactions, which can be too complex for humans to process.
In the context of athlete testing, AI holds numerous potential applications. Its capacity to process large volumes of data
is particularly suited to biomechanical analysis, leading to its integration into a number of movement analysis solutions (12).
Moreover, AI can be used to streamline certain technologies and tests, making jump, speed, and velocity-based gym
exercise assessments feasible with just a mobile phone (9). By leveraging the quality of modern phone cameras and
applying AI and ML techniques to analyze the data, such tests become accessible to more strength and conditioning
professionals. However, it is crucial for practitioners to scrutinize the accuracy and validity of such technologies.
The use of AI in injury prediction is a widely debated subject (12), yet its potential to enhance existing approaches
cannot be overlooked. The ability of AI and ML to process vast quantities of data and comprehend complex interactions
within and across data sets may further such applications. Nevertheless, practitioners must ensure sufficient data collection
quantity and quality. As the maxim “garbage in, garbage out” implies, the success of any model is contingent on the quality
of its inputs. AI’s application in analyzing athlete testing data is a burgeoning field that holds promise for the future. Given
its rapid and constant evolution, it is imperative that practitioners stay informed of developments in this area.
Procedures are detailed, step-by-step instructions on executing specific tasks within the
protocol framework. They provide explicit guidance on methods to ensure consistent data
collection. In physical performance assessments, procedures detail the steps for conducting the
tests outlined in this chapter, such as vertical jumps, aerobic capacity, or agility performance,
ensuring standardized methodologies and reliable data.
Selecting appropriate equipment for athlete physical performance tests can be challenging due to
the wide range of tools and technologies now available. A decision-making framework for
implementing technology in sport (159) suggests four reflective questions:
1. Would the information provided be helpful?
2. Can you trust the information provided?
3. Can you integrate, manage, and analyze the data provided effectively?
4. Can you implement the technology in your practice?
Selecting suitable technology involves ensuring device validity and reliability, considering
practicality and ease of use, and confirming relevance to athletes and their specific sport. This
comprehensive approach ensures that the assessments are accurate, relevant, and actionable,
supporting athlete performance and reduced risk of injury.
774

In summary, considering protocols, procedures, and equipment prior to commencement of
testing is essential. Regularly reviewing these aspects ensures testing batteries remain consistent,
relevant, and effective for athletes’ training programs.
SELECTED TEST PROTOCOLS AND SCORING DATA
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR STRENGTH (LOW-SPEED STRENGTH)
  1  1RM Bench Press  304
  2  1RM Bench Pull  304
  3  1RM Back Squat  305
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR POWER (HIGH-SPEED STRENGTH)
  4  Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull  305
  5  Nordic Hamstring Test  307
  6  1RM Power Clean  308
  7  Standing Long (Broad) Jump  308
  8  Vertical Jump  308
  9  Squat Jump (Static Vertical Jump)  311
10  Drop Jump  312
11  Rebound Jump  313
12  Margaria-Kalamen Test  314
13  Velocity-Based Testing (VBT)  315
ANAEROBIC CAPACITY
14  300-Yard (274 m) Shuttle Run  316
15  90-Second Box Jump Test  317
LOCAL MUSCULAR ENDURANCE
16  Partial Curl-Up  318
17  Push-Up  319
18  Army Fitness Test (AFT) Hand-Release Push-Up (HRP)  320
19  YMCA Bench Press Test  321
AEROBIC CAPACITY
20  1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run  321
21  12-Minute Run  321
22  Yo-Yo Intermittent Recovery Test  322
23  Maximal Aerobic Speed Test  323
24  30-15 Intermittent Fitness Test (IFT)  323
CHANGE OF DIRECTION OR AGILITY
25  T-Test  324
26  Hexagon Test  325
27  5-10-5 Test  326
28  5-0-5 Test  326
775

29  Illinois Test  327
SPEED
30  Straight-Line Sprint Tests  327
BALANCE AND STABILITY
31  Balance Error Scoring System (BESS)  328
32  Star Excursion Balance Test (SEBT)  329
FLEXIBILITY
33  Sit-and-Reach Test  330
34  Overhead Squat  331
BODY COMPOSITION
35  Skinfold Measurements  332
36  Bioelectrical Impedance (BIA)  334
ANTHROPOMETRY
37  Girth Measurements  334
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
  1   1RM BENCH PRESS
Equipment
A barbell, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gradations in weight
A sturdy bench press bench with integral bar rack (preferably of adjustable height)
Personnel
One spotter, one recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbell bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. The spotter stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help in raising the bar
on a failed attempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the rack.
3. As with any maximal strength test, the athlete first does a specific warm-up of 5 to 10
repetitions with a light to moderate load.
4. Usually, at least two heavier warm-up sets of 2 to 5 repetitions each are completed before the
first actual 1RM attempt.
5. Generally, it is desirable to measure the 1RM within three to five attempts after the warm-up;
otherwise, fatigue may detract from the final result.
6. A more detailed step-by-step method for the 1RM protocol is shown in figure 18.8 on page
546.
Note: Normative and descriptive data for the 1RM bench press are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter.
  2   1RM BENCH PULL
776

Equipment
A barbell, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gradations in weight
A high flat bench (specifically, the seal row bench is widely available for this exercise)
Personnel
One spotter, one recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the bench pull (figure 14.3a).
2. The athlete grasps the bar with a closed pronated grip, wider than shoulder width.
3. Bench height is set so the athlete can use a comfortable grip while the weight is off the ground
in the hang position.
4. The athlete starts the lift from the hang position, and the grip should be consistent from test
to test.
5. The bar is pulled up toward the lower chest or upper abdomen with the elbows pointed up
(figure 14.3b).
6. The head position can remain either down or to the side but must remain in contact with the
bench throughout the test.
7. A valid repetition is one in which the bar touches the underside of the bench and the bar is
lowered in a controlled manner to the hang position with full elbow extension without touching
the ground.
8. The feet should remain off the ground throughout the test and in the same position
throughout.
9. A more detailed step-by-step method for the 1RM protocol is shown in figure 18.8 (page 546).
Note: Descriptive data for the 1RM bench pull are presented in table 14.4 near the end of the
chapter.
777

FIGURE 14.3 (a) Starting position and (b) top position of the bench pull.
   3  1RM BACK SQUAT
Equipment
A barbell, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gradations in weight
A sturdy squat rack with adjustable spotting bars to support the weight of the bar if the athlete
is unable to rise (as an alternative, one spotter can be used at each end of the bar)
A flat and solid surface to stand on
Personnel
Two spotters, one recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the back squat as described in chapter 16.
2. Warm-up sets are performed as for the 1RM bench press test. However, the loads lifted are
typically heavier than in the 1RM bench press test, so the load increments will be greater than
those of the 1RM bench press.
3. Refer to figure 18.8 (page 546) for a 1RM testing protocol.
778

Note: Normative and descriptive data for the 1RM back squat are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter.
Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed Strength)
  4   ISOMETRIC MID-THIGH PULL
The isometric mid-thigh pull (IMTP) is a multijoint maximal isometric strength test.
Equipment
Force plate (or two adjacent force plates) that samples at a minimum of 1,000 Hz, but it can
also be conducted using a strain gauge or crane scale that samples at 100 to 133 Hz (29, 32)
An immovable fixed bar to measure peak force and time-dependent variables such as the rate
of force development; this specific testing rack is designed for isometric testing and allows for
stepwise adjustments to the bar height. If a strain gauge is used, a handle is attached to the
strain gauge with a chain.
Weightlifting straps
Computer or tablet with specialized software that allows for the collection and analysis of
force–time curve data
Goniometer to record the knee and hip angles
Personnel
One tester/recorder
779

FIGURE 14.4 Isometric mid-thigh pull (IMTP) test position.
Procedure
1. The testing rack needs to be set to a height that allows the athlete to mirror the “second pull”
position used in weightlifting (i.e., clean or power clean). In this position the immovable bar is
positioned across the upper portion of the thigh, immediately inferior to the pelvis (58) (figure
14.4).
2. When performing the test, the athlete should have an upright trunk position (62, 63) with the
feet roughly hip-width apart and a slight flex of the knee while grasping the bar with a clean
grip while using weightlifting straps (58). In this position the knee angle should be
approximately 120 degrees and 145 degrees, and the hip angle should be approximately 125
degrees and 150 degrees (62). However, it is important to note that the exact bar position as
well as knee and hip angles are difficult to recommend because an individual’s anthropometrics
will exert a large influence on the exact position during the test.
3. Before conducting the isometric mid-thigh pull test it is important that between one and three
familiarization sessions are performed in order to enhance the reliability of the test (62). Less
familiarization is needed with trained athletes, especially those who train regularly with
weightlifting derivatives. First, the athlete should complete a dynamic warm-up that includes
dynamic stretches (e.g., bodyweight squats and lunges) as well as dynamic lifting tasks (e.g.,
low-load and moderate-load mid-thigh pulls). After this is completed, a series of progressively
intense isometric actions should be performed at perceived intensities of 50%, 70%, and 90%
of maximum, with 1 to 2 minutes rest between trials (29, 62). During this time the strength
780

and conditioning professional should monitor the athlete’s body posture and make corrections
as needed.
4. After completing the last submaximal trial, the athlete should complete a minimum of three
maximum-effort trials separated by 1 to 2 minutes of rest. If the main goal of the test is to
determine the peak force that the athlete can produce, each trial should last between 3 and 5
seconds. If the rate of force development (RFD) is of interest, each trial should last up to 1
second (54). Regardless of which protocol is used, if the peak force between trials varies by
more than 15%, additional trials are warranted (105).
5. Regardless of the protocol used to collect the force–time curve, all trials need to be visually
screened to determine whether they meet preestablished criteria (29). If the strength and
conditioning professional notes any of the following, the trial should be discarded and another
trial should be conducted:
A quiet standing period of 1 s with >50 N change in force
Pre-tension (<50 N) while maintaining a rigid torso before initiating force application
A countermovement prior to the onset of force application
Peak force at the end of the pull
6. If the trial is deemed acceptable but the peak force of each trial is not within 15% of the
others, additional trials should be conducted.
7. When analyzing the results of an IMTP test, the most common measures include the peak
force and the force at specific time points (i.e., 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 ms) (figure 14.5).
These metrics are often reported in absolute and relative terms (i.e., force per kg body
weight). Time-dependent variables such as the RFD and impulse are often quantified (and
reflect the change in force production during a certain time period as represented by Δ). The
peak RFD is typically quantified with a 20-millisecond moving window, while the RFD and
impulse are quantified during predetermined time windows (i.e., 0-50, 0-100, 0-200, and 0-250
ms).
Note: Normative data for the IMTP are presented in table 14.6 near the end of the chapter.
781

FIGURE 14.5 IMTP force–time curve.
Reprinted by permission from C.J. Brady, A.J. Harrison, and T.M. Comyns, “A Review of the Reliability of Biomechanical Variables Produced During the Isometric Mid-Thigh
Pull and Isometric Squat and the Reporting of Normative Data,” Sports Biomechanics 19, no. 1 (2020): 1-25, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd,
http://www.tandfonline.com).
   5  NORDIC HAMSTRING TEST
Equipment
A commercially available instrumented device for the measurement of eccentric hamstring
strength or a video recording device
A stable flooring surface on which the dynamometer should be placed
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Set up the instrumented device on a stable surface. The athlete should kneel on the testing
device and place the ankles under the hooks (within which force cells are housed to quantify
force). The athlete should be careful to only contact the hooks with the back of the ankles and
to not push off the board with the toes in order to gain leverage. If not using an instrumented
device but using videography instead, the camera (or mobile phone) should be placed in the
sagittal view and fixed using a tripod or similar and positioned so that the full range of motion
is recorded. The knees of the athlete should be a 90-degree angle of flexion relative to the
lower leg and the rest of the body (figure 14.6a). Care should be taken to ensure that the
athlete does not flex forward at the hips, because occasionally athletes will do this in order to
reduce the eccentric loading on the hamstrings.
2. The athlete should then lean forward under control (i.e., controlled acceleration) by extending
the knees, increasing the knee angle, and maintaining a straight line from the knees through
the shoulders (figure 14.6b).
3. After lowering to the ground in this fashion, the athlete may then use the hands to push back
up to the starting position. Typically, 3 to 6 sets of this test are performed.
782

4. If using an instrumented device, record absolute force of eccentric hamstring force, typically
measured in newtons (N). Ratio or allometric scaling of peak force, as discussed earlier in the
chapter, may also be considered with Nordic hamstring force outputs to account for variations
in body mass and length on the peak force measurements. Other metrics such as torque in
newton-meters (Nm) or the percentage of asymmetry present between left and right
hamstrings may also be recorded if desired. If using videography alone, the break point angle
(the angle at which the external knee flexor moment can no longer be resisted and the athlete
loses active control of downward motion) can be reported as a moderate proxy of eccentric
hamstring strength.
Note: Descriptive data for the Nordic hamstring test are presented in table 14.7 near the end of the
chapter.
783

784

FIGURE 14.6 Nordic hamstring test (without an instrumented device).
   6  1RM POWER CLEAN
Note: Because the power clean exercise has high technical demands, two athletes with the same
muscular power capacity can differ greatly in their tested 1RM, lessening the value of the test for
predicting athletic performance.
Equipment
An Olympic-style barbell with a revolving sleeve, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough
total weight to accommodate the maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of
plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3 kg) gradations in weight
A lifting platform or designated area set apart from the rest of the facility for safety
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the power clean as described in chapter 16.
2. Warm-up sets are performed and load increments are selected as for the 1RM bench press
test.
3. Refer to figure 18.8 (page 546) for a 1RM testing protocol.
Note: Normative and descriptive data for the 1RM power clean are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.4 near the end of the chapter.
  7   STANDING LONG (BROAD) JUMP
Equipment
A flat jumping area at least 20 feet (6 m) in length, which can be a gym floor, artificial turf,
grass field, or a track
A tape measure at least 10 feet (3 m) long
Duct tape or masking tape
Permissible alternative: a commercial jumping mat premarked in half-inch (1 cm) increments
Personnel
One distance judge, one recorder
Procedure
1. Place a 2- to 3-foot (0.6-0.9 m) length of tape on the floor to serve as a starting line.
2. The athlete stands with the toes just behind the starting line.
3. The athlete performs a countermovement and jumps forward as far as possible.
4. The athlete must land on the feet for the jump to be scored. Otherwise, the trial is repeated.
5. A marker is placed at the back edge of the athlete’s rearmost heel, and the tape measure
determines the distance between the starting line and the mark.
6. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inch or 1 centimeter.
Note: Normative and descriptive data for the standing long jump are presented in tables 14.8 to
14.10 near the end of the chapter.
  8   VERTICAL JUMP
785

Equipment
A force plate set up on a stable surface
A suitable computer, tablet, or cell phone connected to force plate hardware and with the
corresponding software installed
Permissible alternatives: a smooth wall with a ceiling higher than the highest jumper’s jump
height plus chalk of a different color than the wall or a commercial device for vertical jump
testing (e.g., Vertec)
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure (Using a Force Plate)
1. Before testing, the tester should calibrate and set up the force plate as per the manufacturer’s
instructions.
2. The force plate should always be set up on a stable surface (ideally in the same location each
time) and the force zeroed with nothing on the plates immediately before the athlete tests.
Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermovement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and downward, and swinging the arms
backward.
3. The countermovement jump is most commonly conducted with hands in a fixed position on the
hips throughout the takeoff portion of the jump to isolate the power and coordination capacity
of the lower limbs. Jumping with the use of an arm swing can also be tested and is referred to
as an Abalakov jump. Either way, consistency should be used and each jump should be tracked
as to whether it was performed with (Abalakov) or without an arm swing.
4. Figure 14.7 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
five phases of a vertical jump with a countermovement when measured with a force plate
testing system.
Procedure (Using a Wall and Chalk)
1. The tester rubs chalk on the fingertips of the athlete’s dominant hand.
2. The athlete stands with the dominant shoulder about 6 inches (15 cm) from the wall and, with
both feet flat on the floor, reaches as high as possible with the dominant hand and makes a
chalk mark on the wall.
3. The athlete then lowers the dominant hand and, without a preparatory or stutter step,
performs a countermovement by quickly flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward
and downward, and swinging the arms backward. During the jump, the dominant arm reaches
upward while the nondominant arm moves downward relative to the body.
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete places a second chalk mark on the wall with the
fingers of the dominant hand, using a swiping motion of the fingers. The score is the vertical
distance between the two chalk marks.
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inch or 1.0 centimeter.
Procedure (Using a Commercial Vertec Device)
1. The tester adjusts the height of the stack of movable color-coded horizontal plastic vanes to be
within the athlete’s standing reach height. The highest vane that can be reached and pushed
forward with the dominant hand while the athlete stands flat-footed determines the standing
touch height.
2. The vane stack is then raised by a measured distance (marked on the shaft holding the vanes)
so that the athlete will not jump higher or lower than the set of vanes. This requires a rough
786

estimate of how high the particular athlete will jump, but a correction can be made on the
second attempt if necessary.
3. Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermovement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and downward, and swinging the arms
backward (figure 14.8a). During the jump, the dominant arm reaches upward while the
nondominant arm moves downward relative to the body.
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete taps the highest possible vane with the fingers of
the dominant hand (figure 14.8b). The score is the vertical distance between the height of the
highest vane tapped during the standing vertical reach and the vane tapped at the highest
point of the jump.
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inches or 1 centimeter (the distance
between adjacent vanes).
FIGURE 14.7 Example force–time curve of a countermovement jump when measured with a force plate testing system. Vertical
dotted lines divide the typical phases (UP, unloading phase; BP, breaking phase; PP, propulsive phase; FP, flight phase; LP, landing
phase).
Reprinted by permission from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190.
https://doi.org/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by
/4.0/).
The strength and conditioning professional should be aware of potential sources of error with the
jump-and-reach-style tests. These include a disconnect between the moment when the athlete
reaches the wall or vanes with the hand and the moment the maximum height of the body’s center
of mass is achieved; additionally, shoulder mobility issues may limit some athlete’s reach height.
Also, jump height values calculated using common technologies such as force plates and contact
mats are most often measured as the maximum total body center of mass height relative to its
height at takeoff and not relative to its height when standing still (158). Thus, jump height values
from jump-and-reach tests should not be compared directly to, or used interchangeably with, jump
height values recorded with such technologies or, indeed, with different jump techniques, such as
when keeping arms akimbo.
Note: Descriptive data for the vertical jump are presented in table 14.5 and table 14.10 near the
end of the chapter.
787

FIGURE 14.8 (a) Starting position and (b) maximum height of the vertical jump using the Vertec.
   9  SQUAT JUMP (STATIC VERTICAL JUMP)
The equipment needed and the personnel required for the squat (static) vertical jump are the same
as the vertical jump with a countermovement.
Procedure
1. The test procedures are essentially the same as for the vertical jump, except that the
countermovement is removed. Begin with the athlete standing on a calibrated, zeroed force
platform. (Note: The squat jump and vertical jump with countermovement can also be tested
using a switch or contact mat system (figure 14.9) [158], which estimates jump height [51]
but cannot measure force outputs.)
2. The athlete descends into a squat position (knee angle approximately 110 degrees) and holds
this position for 2 to 3 seconds before jumping vertically, keeping hands fixed on hips.
3. The takeoff and landing positions, as well as jumping strategy, should be the same for each
trial. Specifically, the tester should ensure there is no countermovement (dip) at the start of
the jump, both through visual observation and, where a force plate is used, by assessing the
force–time curve.
4. The best of three trials is recorded. The ratio of the vertical jump height with
countermovement to squat jump height can be calculated as the eccentric utilization ratio (99).
5. Figure 14.10 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
three phases of a static vertical jump when measured with a force plate testing system.
Note: Descriptive data for the static vertical jump are presented in table 14.10 near the end of the
chapter.
788

FIGURE 14.9  (a) Starting position and (b) maximum height of the static vertical jump when measured with a switch mat.
FIGURE 14.10 Example force–time curve of a static vertical (squat) jump when measured with a force plate testing system.
Vertical dotted lines divide the typical phases (BP, breaking phase; PP, propulsive phase; FP, flight phase; LP, landing phase).
Adapted from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190. https://doi.org
/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
789

   10  DROP JUMP
Equipment
A box that may vary in height from 8 to 16 inches (20-40 cm)
Floor with good traction
Measurement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding software on laptop or
tablet), switch mats, optoelectronic systems, and smartphone applications
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. When performing a drop vertical jump, the athlete should step out before free-falling from as
close as possible to the height of the box rather than stepping down (i.e., lowering) or jumping
off (i.e., rising) the box. Box height selection for an athlete can vary but is typically 20
centimeters (8 in.), 30 centimeters (12 in.), or 40 centimeters (16 in.) (figure 14.11a). The
higher the box, the greater the plyometric demand. When using a device that is not flush with
the ground or base of the box when conducting the drop vertical jump test, such as when
using a switch mat, the strength and conditioning professional should measure the box height
from the top of the box to the top surface of the switch mat.
2. The athlete steps out from the box and lands on the floor, force plate, or switch mat (figure
14.11b) and, as quickly as possible, jumps again (figure 14.11c). Drop jumps should be
performed with the athlete attempting to jump with a short ground contact time while still
aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground contact time is achieved by limiting flexion
of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with the ground by adopting high leg stiffness
(high force with shallow range of motion). It is advised that at least 2 to 3 sets are performed.
3. The most reported performance variables following drop vertical jump testing are jump height
(from flight time), ground contact time, and reactive strength index (calculated as jump
height divided by ground contact time) (91). The reactive strength index is often considered an
indication of how well an athlete can recruit the fast component of the stretch-shortening
cycle.
4. Figure 14.12 shows an example of the force–time curve with labels pointing out the peak
vertical ground reaction force, contact time, and flight time when measured with a force plate
testing system.
790

FIGURE 14.11 (a) Starting position on box, (b) contact on switch mat, (c) maximum height of the drop jump to measure reactive
strength index.
FIGURE 14.12 Example force–time curve of a drop jump.
Reprinted by permission from R. Healy and A.J. Harrison, “The Effects of a Unilateral Gluteal Activation Protocol on Single Leg Drop Jump Performance,” Sports
Biomechanics 13, no. 1 (2014): 33-46, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
791

  11   REBOUND JUMP
Equipment
Floor with good traction
Measurement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding software on a laptop or
tablet), jump mats, optoelectronic systems, and smartphone applications
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Rebound-based vertical jumps require the athlete to jump from a preceding vertical jump.
When performing a rebound vertical jump, the athlete should first complete a maximal-effort
vertical countermovement jump followed by either a predetermined number of rebound
vertical jump repetitions or a predetermined set duration (e.g., 10 seconds). Rebound vertical
jumps from a ground-start position have been performed with single or multiple repetitions,
including the 10-5 repeated jump test (64), which requires 10 maximal vertical rebound jumps
following the initial maximum countermovement jump.
2. All styles of rebound vertical jump should be performed with the athlete attempting to jump
with a short ground contact time while still aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground
contact time is achieved by limiting flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with
the ground by adopting high leg stiffness (high force with shallow range of motion).
3. As per the drop jump, the most reported performance variables following rebound vertical
jump testing are jump height, ground contact time, and reactive strength index (calculated as
jump height divided by ground contact time). For the 10-5 repeated jump test, the best 5
repetitions in terms of reactive strength index are used and averaged for the test outcome.
Note: Descriptive data for the rebound jump are presented in table 14.11 near the end of the
chapter.
   12  MARGARIA-KALAMEN TEST
Equipment
Staircase with nine or more steps, each approximately 7 inches (18 cm) high, and a straight
and flat lead-up area 20 feet (6 m) or more in length (figure 14.13)
Measuring tape or stick
An electronic timing system with both a start and a stop switch mechanism
Scale
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. The height of each step is measured with a ruler or tape measure, and the elevation from the
third step to the ninth step is calculated (6 × step height).
2. The timer start switch mechanism is placed on the third step, and the stop switch mechanism
is placed on the ninth step.
3. The athlete to be tested is weighed on a scale, warms up, and practices running up the stairs
three steps at a time.
4. When ready, the athlete sprints toward the stairs from a standing start 20 feet (6 m) from the
base of the stairs and then up the staircase three steps at a time (third step to sixth step to
792

ninth step) as fast as possible.
5. The time from third- to ninth-step contact is determined to the nearest 0.01 second using the
timing system.
6. Power in watts is calculated as the athlete’s weight (w) in newtons (lb × 4.45 or kg × 9.807)
times height (h) in meters (inches × 0.0254) from the third step to the ninth step divided by
the measured time interval (t) in seconds; P (watts) = (w × h) / t.
7. Repeat the test two more times with a 2- to 3-minute recovery period between each trial.
Note: Normative data for the Margaria-Kalamen test are presented in table 14.12 near the end of
the chapter.
FIGURE 14.13 Margaria-Kalamen stair sprint test.
Reprinted by permission from E. Fox, R. Bowers, and M. Foss, The Physiological Basis for Exercise and Sport, 5th ed. (Brown & Benchmark, 1993), 675, permission
conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
   13  VELOCITY-BASED TESTING (VBT)
Equipment
A commercial VBT device and the equipment required to perform the exercise in question (e.g.,
an inertial measurement unit [IMU], a linear position transducer, a depth-sensing camera
system, and a computer-vision enabled smartphone application)
An Olympic-style barbell with weight plates and locking collars; the weight should be
appropriate for the individual athlete being tested (in this case, a 1RM back squat will be the
exercise evaluated)
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Place the VBT device in a suitable position based on the type of data collection. For example, a
linear position transducer will be placed under the barbell and tethered to the barbell, whereas
an IMU sensor will be affixed directly to the barbell.
2. The exercise selected (e.g., bench press, squat, deadlift) will depend on the needs of the
athlete, individual sport, and training session being performed. In the case of a back squat,
793

follow the technique described in chapter 16.
3. From the measuring device, obtain the velocity of the barbell typically in meters per second,
power measured in watts, and peak forces measured in newtons. Metrics may vary depending
on the device used for testing or the individual purposes of the tester and athlete. As outlined
earlier in the chapter, VBT data can be used to create a load–velocity profile.
Note: Descriptive data for VBT are presented in table 14.13 near the end of the chapter.
Anaerobic Capacity
  14   300-YARD (274 M) SHUTTLE RUN
Equipment
A stopwatch with at least 0.1-second resolution
Two parallel lines 25 yards (23 m) apart on a flat surface (figure 14.14)
Personnel
One timer, two line judges
Procedure
1. Pair off athletes of similar ability.
2. Position two athletes immediately behind one line, facing the other line.
3. On an auditory signal, the athletes sprint to the line 25 yards (23 m) away, making foot
contact with it, then immediately sprint back to the first line. Six such round trips are made as
fast as possible without stopping (6 × 50 yd = 300 yd [274 m]).
4. On completion of the first trial, record both athletes’ times to the nearest 0.1 second and start
a clock to time a 5-minute rest interval. As each pair of athletes completes the first trial, they
may walk and stretch but must stay alert for the starting time on the second trial.
5. After the rest period, the pair of athletes does another trial.
6. The average of two trials is recorded to the nearest 0.1 second.
Note: Descriptive data for the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle are presented in table 14.14 near the end
of the chapter.
794

FIGURE 14.14 Ground layout for the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle.
Adapted by permission from G.M. Gillam and M. Marks, “300 Yard Shuttle Run,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 5, no. 5 (1983): 46.
   15  90-SECOND BOX JUMP TEST
Equipment
Stopwatch
A box with the dimensions of 18 inches (46 cm) in height and 30 inches (76 cm) in width
A nonslip surface on which to perform the test in which the athlete can safely land and jump
Personnel
One recorder/tester
Procedure
1. The purpose of this test is to observe how many times the athlete can jump over the box in a
left to right fashion over a duration of 90 seconds. The athlete begins on top of the box and
then jumps down laterally to one side before jumping back up to the top of the box again. The
athlete then repeats this procedure in the opposite direction. Each time the athlete reaches the
top of the box counts as 1 repetition.
2. The athlete must leave the ground with two feet and touch the top of the box with two feet
before jumping down to the other side. The athlete is not permitted to step up onto the box.
3. This is repeated for as many times as the athlete is able to during the 90-second duration of
the test. The tester should record the number of hops taken with proper form over the course
of the test.
Note: Descriptive data for the 90-second box jump test are presented in table 14.15 near the end
of the chapter.
Local Muscular Endurance
  16   PARTIAL CURL-UP
The partial curl-up test measures the muscular endurance of the abdominal muscles. It is favored
over the sit-up test because it eliminates the use of the hip flexor muscles.
795

Equipment
Metronome
Ruler
Masking tape
Mat
Personnel
One recorder/technique judge
Procedure
1. The athlete assumes a supine position on a mat with a 90-degree knee angle (figure 14.15a).
The arms are at the sides, resting on the floor, with the fingers touching a 4-inch-long (10 cm)
piece of masking tape positioned perpendicular to the fingers. A second piece of masking tape
is situated parallel to the first tape at a distance determined by the age of the athlete (4.7
inches [12 cm] for those younger than 45 and 3.1 inches [8 cm] for those 45 or older).
2. Set a metronome to 40 beats/min and have the athlete do slow, controlled curl-ups to lift the
shoulder blades off the mat (trunk makes a 30-degree angle with the mat; figure 14.15b) in
time with the metronome (20 curl-ups per minute). The upper back must touch the floor
before each curl-up. The athlete should avoid flexing the neck to bring the chin close to the
chest.
3. The athlete performs as many curl-ups as possible without pausing, to a maximum of 75.
Note: Normative data for the partial curl-up are presented in table 14.16 near the end of the
chapter.
FIGURE 14.15 (a) Beginning position and (b) end position of the partial curl-up test.
   17  PUSH-UP
Equipment
A 4-inch (10 cm)-diameter foam roller (for the modified push-up)
Personnel
796

One recorder/technique judge
Procedures
1. Assume the standard push-up starting position with the hands shoulder-width apart and
elbows and body straight (figure 14.16a). The bottom position for the standard push-up is
when the chest makes contact with the recorder’s fist held vertically against the ground (not
shown in figure 14.16b).
2. A modified version establishes a starting position with the knees rather than the feet
contacting the ground; the knees should be flexed to 90 degrees with the ankles crossed
(figure 14.17a). There is no standard criterion for the bottom position of the modified push-up
(44), but it has been suggested that the torso should come in contact with a foam roller rather
than a fist (figure 14.17b).
3. For either version, repetitions that do not achieve the bottom position are not counted.
Note: Normative data for the push-up are presented in table 14.17 near the end of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.16 (a) Beginning position and (b) down position of the standard push-up.
FIGURE 14.17 (a) Beginning position and (b) down position of the modified push-up.
18   ARMY FITNESS TEST (AFT) HAND-RELEASE PUSH-UP
(HRP)
Equipment
Level nonslip ground or flooring surface
Personnel
One recorder/technique judge
Procedure
797

1. The starting position of this test will begin with the athlete lying prone on the ground with the
chest, hips, and legs touching the ground (figure 14.18a). Hands are flat on the ground (rather
than what is shown in the photo) with the index fingers inside of the shoulders. The feet
should be no more than one boot-width part, and the toes should be touching the ground.
2. The tester will begin the test on the command of “Go,” and the athlete must perform as many
push-ups as physically able in a 2-minute time period. The athlete should keep a straight line
from the ankles to the head (figure 14.18b). It is not permissible to flex the knees or hips or to
lift the feet off of the ground at any point during the test. After the athlete has fully extended
the arms, he or she should lower the body back to the ground, allowing the chest, hips, and
legs to contact the ground simultaneously. The tester should not count any repetitions in which
a straight alignment of the body from head to feet is not maintained.
3. At the point at which the athlete’s body comes back into contact with the ground, two variants
of this test are acceptable: the hand lift and the arm extension. If the hand lift variant is to be
performed, the athlete should lift both hands so as to create visible space between the palms
and the ground (figure 14.18c). The athlete should then return the hands to the starting
position and begin another repetition. With the arm extension variant, once the athlete’s body
has returned to the ground, the athlete will then extend the arms fully to form a 90-degree
angle between the arms and the torso (figure 14.18d). The athlete should then return to the
starting position and begin another repetition.
4. The athlete is not allowed to rest at any time during the test with the exception of the front
rest position, which consists of the top position of the push-up with the arms fully extended
and the body straight. If the tester observes that the athlete has remained motionless for more
than 5 seconds, the test should be discontinued and the repetitions performed to this point
counted as the athlete’s score for the test. The test will also be discontinued if the athlete lifts
a foot off of the ground or touches a knee to the ground. Any breakdown in technique such as
flexing the hips or knees should not be counted in the repetition total.
Note: AFT normative data for the hand-release push-up are presented in table 14.18 near the end
of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Beginning position (but with the hands on the ground instead), (b) up position, (c) hand lift variant, and (d)
arm extension variant of the hand-release push-up.
798

  19   YMCA BENCH PRESS TEST
Equipment
A barbell, weight plates, two safety locks, and enough total weight to assemble an 80-pound
(36 kg) or a 35-pound (16 kg) load (including safety locks)
Flat bench press bench (preferably with an upright rack to hold the barbell)
Metronome
Personnel
One spotter/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbell bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. Allow the athlete to perform a specific warm-up of 5 to 10 repetitions with a light to moderate
load.
3. The spotter/recorder stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help raise the
bar on a failed attempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the rack.
4. Set the resistance at 80 pounds (36 kg) for males and 35 pounds (16 kg) for females.
5. Set the metronome cadence at 60 beats/min to establish a rate of 30 repetitions per minute
(one beat up, one beat down).
6. The athlete grips the bar at shoulder-width, lifts the bar off the rack, and extends the elbows.
Then, in time with the metronome, the athlete repeatedly lowers the bar to the chest and
raises it up again to full elbow extension, until the athlete can no longer keep up with the
metronome. The movement should be smooth and controlled, with the bar reaching its highest
and lowest position with each beat of the metronome.
Note: Normative data for the YMCA bench press test are presented in table 14.19 near the end of
the chapter.
Aerobic Capacity
  20   1.5-MILE (2.4 KM) RUN
Equipment
Stopwatch
Quarter-mile running track or measured and marked 1.5-mile (2.4 km) flat course with a good
running surface
Personnel
One tester to call off each athlete’s time, one recorder
Procedure
1. Have each athlete warm up and stretch before the test.
2. Each athlete should be recognizable to the scorer at the finish line. If that is not possible,
numbers should be pinned to the athletes’ shirts.
3. At the start, all athletes line up behind the starting line.
4. Instruct the athletes to complete the run as quickly as possible at a steady pace that they can
barely maintain over the distance. (Note: Some athletes may have limited experience at pacing
799

long efforts such as this, so some familiarization and prior pacing efforts in training are
suggested.)
5. On an auditory signal, the athletes start running and cover the course as quickly as possible.
6. As the athletes cross the finish line, each person’s time is recorded on a form as a timer calls
off the time in minutes and seconds (00:00).
Note: Normative data for the 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25
near the end of the chapter. For each 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, the tables show an estimated
maximal rate of oxygen consumption; the norms for athletes in various sports are shown in table
14.26 near the end of the chapter.
  21   12-MINUTE RUN
Equipment
A 400-meter (437-yard) track or flat looped course with a marker at each 100 meters
Stopwatch
Personnel
One tester to call out each athlete’s position, one recorder
Procedure
1. Athletes line up at the starting line.
2. On an auditory signal, the athletes travel by foot as far as possible in 12 minutes, preferably by
running but, if necessary, by walking part or all of the time.
3. At 12 minutes, on an auditory signal, all the athletes stop in place.
4. The distance run by each athlete (laps × 400 m—e.g., 5.25 laps × 400 m = 2,100 m) is
calculated and recorded.
Note: Normative data for the 12-minute run are presented in table 14.27 near the end of the
chapter.
22   YO-YO INTERMITTENT RECOVERY TEST
The use of the Yo-Yo intermittent recovery tests (IRT1 and IRT2) is now commonplace in field
testing protocols for team sports such as soccer and lacrosse (10, 18, 85). It is suggested that
these tests are more specific to team sports because they mimic the demands of short, intense
bursts of exercise followed by short recovery periods. Both tests consist of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd)
shuttle runs at increasing speeds interspersed with a 10-second period of recovery, with the IRT1
starting at 10 km/h (6.2 mph) and the IRT2 starting at 13 km/h (8.1 mph). It is recommended that
strength and conditioning professionals use the IRT1.
Equipment
Cones
A tape measure at least 30 meters (33 yd) long
Audio software specifically for the Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test, IRT1 (available from a
variety of commercial sources)
Method of broadcasting the audio files (e.g., wireless speakers)
Recording sheet
Flat floor with good traction
Personnel
One tester/recorder, one spotter
800

Procedure
1. Measure out a 20-meter (22 yd) test course and arrange cones as seen in figure 14.19. Place
markers 2 meters (7 ft) apart at both ends of the test course at the start and turning lines.
Also measure out a 5-meter (16 ft) distance behind the start line.
2. Have the athletes warm up and stretch before the test. The athletes should run the course
with a submaximal effort for practice.
3. The test begins with the athletes standing at the start line.
4. On an auditory signal, the athletes run forward to the turning line. At the sound of the second
signal, athletes arrive at the turning line and then run back to the starting line, arriving in time
with the next sound.
5. When the start marker is passed, the athletes jog toward the 5-meter (16 ft) mark, then turn
back to the start line. At this point the athletes stop and wait for the next sound.
6. The athletes are required to place one foot on or over the starting or turning line at the sound
of each beep.
7. The athletes continue running for as long as they can maintain the increasing speed as
indicated by the auditory signals.
8. The termination of the test is indicated by the inability of an athlete to maintain the required
pace for two trials. A warning is given the first time the start or turning line is not reached.
9. At the end of the test, record the last level and number of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd) intervals
performed at that level on a recording sheet.
10. The final Yo-Yo intermittent recovery speed and interval score can be used to calculate the
total distance covered by the athlete during the test.
Note: Descriptive data for the Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test are presented in table 14.28 near the
end of the chapter.
801

FIGURE 14.19 Setup for the Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test.
   23  MAXIMAL AEROBIC SPEED TEST
Equipment
Cones
A tape measure at least 30 meters (33 yd) long
Audio software specifically for the test
Method of broadcasting the audio files (e.g., wireless speakers)
Recording sheet
Indoor or outdoor running track (at least 200 m [219 yd])
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Marker cones are placed at 25-meter (27 yd) intervals around the running track.
2. The initial speed of the test is set between 8 and 12 km/h (5-7 mph) depending on the fitness
level of the athlete. It is generally recommended that athletes start at 10 km/h (6 mph).
3. The speed is then increased by 1 km/h (0.6 mph) every 2 minutes until the athlete cannot
maintain the speed.
802

4. The last speed maintained for at least 2 minutes is considered the speed associated with
V̇O2max or MAS.
5. The test is terminated if the athlete fails to reach the next cone on two consecutive occasions
in the required time.
6. The speed at the last completed stage is increased by 0.5 km/h if the athlete is able to run a
half stage.
7. The V̇O2max of the athlete can be calculated by multiplying 3.5 × MAS (speed in km/h) (87,
88).
8. If the tester does not have access to the audio version, it is possible to conduct the test using
a whistle. Calculate the timing of whistles using a set speed for reaching the next cone. For
example, when the distance between cones is 25 meters, the timing of whistles for 10 km/h
would be every 9 seconds.
Note: Norms for the V̇O2max of athletes in various sports are shown in table 14.26 near the end of
the chapter.
  24   30-15 INTERMITTENT FITNESS TEST (IFT)
Equipment
A 40-meter (44 yd) long surface that is stable and suitable for an athlete to run on
Measuring tape
Marking cones
30-15 IFT audio recording and a player suitable for the media type being used that can be
heard across the testing environment
Personnel
One recorder/tester
Procedure
1. Measure out and arrange the cones as shown in figure 14.20 (at lines A, B, and C).
2. Have the athletes warm up before the test by running the course with a submaximal effort for
practice.
3. The test begins with the athletes standing at the start line (line A).
4. The first interval begins at a jogging speed of 8.0 km/h (5 mph). The speed is then increased
by 0.5 km/h (0.3 mph) in each subsequent stage.
5. Athletes run using the beeps played from the audio file to maintain their pace. They run
between lines A and C, and they should pass through each 3-meter (10 ft) zone associated
with lines A, B, and C with the sound of each beep.
6. A different type of beep indicates when to stop running. At that point the athletes have 15
seconds as a recovery to walk to the next line, where they will wait for the start of the next
interval.
7. Athletes advance stages until they cannot reach the relevant line on three consecutive beeps.
8. Record the running speed (km/h) achieved during the last completed stage (VIFT). The total
running distance of each interval is corrected by a factor of 0.7 second per change of direction.
Note: Descriptive data for the 30-15 IFT are presented in figure 14.34 (a, females; b, males) near
the end of the chapter.
803

FIGURE 14.20 30-15 IFT course layout.
Reprinted by permission from M. Buccheit, “The 30-15 Intermittent Fitness Test: Accuracy for Individualizing Interval Training of Young Intermittent Sport Players,” Journal
of Strength and Conditioning Research 22, no. 2 (2008): 365-374.
Change of Direction or Agility
  25   T-TEST
Equipment
Four cones
A tape measure at least 5 yards (4.6 m) long
Stopwatch or timing gates, if available, with corresponding software on a laptop, tablet, or
smartphone application
Flat floor with good traction
Personnel
One tester/recorder, one spotter
Procedure
1. Arrange four cones as shown in figure 14.21 (points A, B, C, and D). Set the timing gates up at
the start and finish line.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal effort for practice.
3. The test begins with the athlete standing at point A.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward to point B and touches the base of the cone
with the right hand.
5. Then, while facing forward and not crossing the feet, the athlete shuffles to the left 5 yards
(4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point C with the left hand.
6. The athlete then shuffles to the right 10 yards (9 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
D with the right hand.
7. The athlete then shuffles to the left 5 yards (4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
B with the left hand, and next runs backward past point A, at which time the watch is stopped.
8. For safety, a spotter and gym mat should be positioned several feet behind point A to catch an
athlete who falls while running backward.
9. The best time of two trials is recorded to the nearest 0.1 second.
804

10. The following are reasons for disqualification of a trial: The athlete fails to touch the base of
any cone, crosses one foot in front of the other instead of shuffling the feet, or fails to face
forward for the entire test.
Note: Descriptive data for the T-test are presented in table 14.29 near the end of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.21 Floor layout for the T-test.
Adapted by permission from D. Semenick, “Tests and Measurements: The T-Test,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 12, no. 1 (1990): 36-37.
   26  HEXAGON TEST
Equipment
Adhesive tape of a color that contrasts with the floor
Measuring tape or stick
Stopwatch
Flat floor with good traction
Personnel
One timer/recorder, one line judge
Procedure
1. Using the adhesive tape, create a hexagon on the floor with 24-inch (61 cm) sides meeting to
form 120-degree angles (figure 14.22).
2. The athlete warms up and practices performance of the test at submaximal speed.
3. The test begins with the athlete standing in the middle of the hexagon.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete begins double-leg hopping from the center of the hexagon
over each side and back to the center, starting with the side directly in front of the athlete, in a
continuous clockwise sequence until all six sides are covered three times (three revolutions
around the hexagon for a total of 18 jumps) and the athlete is again standing at the center.
The athlete remains facing the same direction throughout the test.
5. If the athlete lands on a side of the hexagon rather than over it, or loses balance and takes an
extra step or changes the direction in which he or she is facing, the trial is stopped and
restarted after the athlete is allowed time for full recovery.
805

6. The best time of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.1 second.
Note: Descriptive data for the hexagon test are presented in table 14.29 near the end of the
chapter.
FIGURE 14.22 Layout for the hexagon test.
Adapted by permission from K. Pauole, K. Madole, J. Garhammer, et al., “Reliability and Validity of the T-Test as a Measure of Agility, Leg Power, and Leg Speed in College-
Aged Men and Women,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 14, no. 4 (2000): 443-450.
   27  5-10-5 TEST
This test is also called the pro agility test or the 20-yard shuttle.
Equipment
An American football field or other field marked with three parallel lines 5 yards (4.6 m) apart
(figure 14.23)
Stopwatch or timing gates, if available, with corresponding software on a laptop, tablet, or
smartphone application
Personnel
One timer/recorder, one line judge
Procedure
1. If using one timing gate for total end time, set this up at the start and finish line. If multiple
gates are available, set up at the start and finish line as well as at each turn line to measure
each split.
2. The athlete straddles the center line using a three-point stance.
3. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the line on the left, then changes
direction and sprints 10 yards (9 m) to the line on the right, then again changes direction and
sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the center line. Hand (or foot) contact must be made with all
indicated lines. (Note: It is important that this is kept consistent for both trials.)
4. The best time of two trials is recorded to the nearest 0.01 second.
Note: Normative data for the 5-10-5 test (previously pro agility) are presented in tables 14.29 and
14.30 near the end of the chapter.
806

FIGURE 14.23 Layout for the 5-10-5 test.
  28   5-0-5 TEST
Equipment
Seven cones
Stopwatch or timing gates, if available, with corresponding software on a laptop, tablet, or
smartphone application
Personnel
One timer/recorder, one line judge
Procedure
1. Arrange the cones as seen in figure 14.24. If timing lights are available, these can also be set
up as shown.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal effort for practice.
3. The test begins with the athlete standing at the start line.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward 10 meters (11 yd) to the first set of timing
lights, then sprints a further 5 meters (5 yd) to the turning line (one foot must be on or over
the line), where he or she is required to turn and accelerate off the line.
5. The athlete may slow down only after passing through the timing lights for the second time.
6. The best time of two trials is recorded to the nearest 0.1 second.
7. The athlete completes the trials turning off the preferred leg. Alternatively, trials (at least two)
can be administered turning off either the preferred or non-preferred leg.
Note: Descriptive data for the 5-0-5 test is presented in tables 14.29 and 14.30 near the end of the
chapter.
807

FIGURE 14.24 Layout for the 5-0-5 test.
29   ILLINOIS TEST
Equipment
Stopwatch or timing lights
Tape measure
Eight cones
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Set up the cones on a course of 10 meters (11 yd) in length by 5 meters (5 yd) in width. Four
cones should be on the corners of the 10-meter × 5-meter square, with the additional four
placed in the center of the 5-meter width equally spaced along the 10-meter length. This will
create three aisles of cones in the order of two, four, and two through which the athlete will
run (figure 14.25).
2. Instruct the athlete to lie prone at the cone to the outside left of the full 10-meter length. The
athlete will be instructed to get up and run when the tester says “Go,” sprint to the cone 10
meters ahead, and then turn around to sprint back to the cones in the middle aisle.
808

3. The athlete then slaloms through the four cones in the center aisle in both directions before
then running to the cone at the opposite end of the third aisle.
4. The athlete sprints the 10 meters of the third aisle to complete the test.
5. The tester will stop the timer once the athlete has completed the third aisle of cones and
record the time.
6. Note: Normative data for the Illinois test are presented tables 14.31 and 14.32 near the end of
the chapter.
FIGURE 14.25 Layout for the Illinois test.
Reprinted by permission from R. Lockie, “Testing, Assessment, and Monitoring of Agility and Quickness,” in Developing Agility and Quickness, 2nd ed., edited for the
National Strength and Conditioning Association by J. Dawes (Human Kinetics, 2019), 93.
Speed
  30   STRAIGHT-LINE SPRINT TESTS
Equipment
Stopwatch or timing gates, if available, with corresponding software on a laptop, tablet, or
smartphone application
809

Flat running surface with start and finish lines a specified distance apart (e.g., 40 yd [37 m];
10 m, 20 m, 40 m), with at least 20 yards (18 m) after the finish line for deceleration
Where multiple timing gates are available, set these up to determine additional split times, in
addition to the start and finish lines (e.g., start line, 10 yd [9 m], 20 yd [18 m], finish line at 40
yd [37 m]). This enables greater insight into acceleration capacities in addition to the maximal
speed.
Personnel
One timer/recorder
Procedure
1. Have the athlete warm up and dynamically stretch for several minutes.
2. Allow at least two practice runs at submaximal speed.
3. The athlete assumes a starting position using a three- or four-point stance.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints the specified distance at maximal speed.
5. The best split times of two trials are recorded to the nearest 0.1 second.
6. Allow at least 2 minutes of active recovery or rest between trials.
Note: Normative data for the 10-meter (11 yd), 20-meter (22 yd), 40-meter (44 yd), and 40-yard
(37 m) sprint are presented in table 14.33 near the end of the chapter.
Balance and Stability
  31   BALANCE ERROR SCORING SYSTEM (BESS)
Equipment
Foam balance pad
Stopwatch
Personnel
One timer/recorder
Procedure
1. The six positions of the BESS are shown in figure 14.26.
2. The three stance positions are double-leg stance with feet together, single-leg stance on the
nondominant foot with contralateral leg in approximately 90 degrees of flexion, and tandem
stance with the dominant foot in front of the nondominant foot (128). The test is conducted on
a firm surface and on a soft surface.
3. The stances are held for 20 seconds with eyes closed and hands on hips for each condition.
4. Athletes are told to keep as steady as possible, and if they lose balance, they attempt to regain
their initial position as quickly as possible.
5. Errors include opening eyes; lifting the hands from the hips; touchdown of nonstance foot;
step, hop, or other movement of the stance foot or feet; lifting the forefeet or heel; moving
the hip into more than 30 degrees of hip flexion or abduction; or remaining out of position for
more than 5 seconds.
6. The error scores from the BESS test are summed into a single score.
Note: Normative data for the BESS are presented in table 14.34 near the end of the chapter.
810

FIGURE 14.26 Balance error scoring system (BESS): (a-c) firm surface condition and (d-f) soft surface condition.
32   STAR EXCURSION BALANCE TEST (SEBT)
Equipment
Adhesive tape
Personnel
One recorder
Procedure
1. The athlete stands in the center of a grid with eight lines (120 cm [47 in.]) extending out at
45-degree increments as shown in figure 14.27 (115, 126).
2. The athlete maintains a single-leg stance facing in one direction while reaching with the
contralateral leg as far as possible for each taped line, touching the farthest point possible and
811

then returning to the bilateral position. Within a single trial, the athlete remains facing in the
beginning direction and the stance leg remains the same, with the other leg doing all of the
reaching.
3. The distance from the center of the star to the touch position is measured.
4. The starting direction and support leg are chosen randomly. Three trials are performed for
each condition and averaged.
5. A 15-second rest is allowed between each reach.
6. Trials are discarded if the athlete does not touch the line, lifts the stance foot from the center
grid, loses balance, or does not maintain start and return positions for 1 full second.
7. Athletes should be given a minimum of four practice trials before being tested (103).
8. It has been suggested that testing the anteromedial, medial, and posteromedial positions is
sufficient for most situations (66).
Note: Normative data for the star excursion balance test are presented in tables 14.20 and 14.21
near the end of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.27 Directions for the star excursion balance test (SEBT).
Reprinted by permission from M.P. Reiman and R.C. Manske, Functional Testing in Human Performance (Human Kinetics, 2009), 109.
Flexibility
  33   SIT-AND-REACH TEST
Note: A consistent method for the sit-and-reach test should be maintained if the test is done
periodically. For example, if the test is performed with a measuring tape or stick during initial
testing of the athlete, all subsequent testing of the athlete should be performed with a measuring
tape or stick (i.e., a sit-and-reach box should not be used instead).
Equipment
Measuring tape or stick
Adhesive tape
Permissible alternative: a standard sit-and-reach box
Personnel
One tester/recorder
812

Procedure
1. Tape the measuring stick or tape measure to the floor. Place one piece of tape about 24 inches
(61 cm) long across the measuring stick and at a right angle to it at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark.
2. Have the athlete warm up with nonballistic exercises involving the hamstrings and lower back
(e.g., by walking rapidly for 3-5 min); performing several repetitions of flexing forward from a
standing, knees-extended position, reaching toward the toes, then reaching upward toward the
ceiling (all without jerking); jogging in place while trying to kick the heels into the upper thighs
from behind; and finishing with standing toe-touching or similar stretching on the floor.
3. Have the athlete sit shoeless with the measuring stick between the legs with its zero end
toward the body, the feet 12 inches (30 cm) apart, the toes pointed upward, and the heels
nearly touching the edge of the taped line at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark (figure 14.28a).
4. The athlete slowly reaches forward with both hands as far as possible on the measuring stick,
holding this position momentarily. To get the best stretch, the athlete should exhale and drop
the head between the arms when reaching. Be sure the athlete keeps the hands adjacent to
each other and does not lead with one hand. The fingertips should remain in contact with the
measuring stick (figure 14.28b). The tester may hold the athlete’s knees down, if necessary, to
keep them straight. A score of less than 15 inches indicates that the athlete could not reach
the bottom of the feet.
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.25 inch or 1 centimeter.
Note: Normative data for the sit-and-reach test are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 near
the end of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.28 (a) Starting position and (b) final position of the sit-and-reach test.
34   OVERHEAD SQUAT
Equipment
Wooden dowel or barbell
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
813

1. The athlete holds the wooden dowel overhead with the shoulders fully flexed and with elbows
locked. The grip should be twice shoulder-width using biacromial width as the reference
measurement point for shoulder width. Biacromial width is the distance between the widest
bony points at the superior portion of both shoulders. The feet are approximately shoulder-
width apart, with toes pointing forward or slightly out (figure 14.29a).
2. The athlete then squats down; the initial action is flexion of the hips and knees. The heels
remain in contact with the floor at all times.
3. The lowering continues until the crease of the hips is below the top of the knee.
4. The athlete should be able to hold this position with the torso remaining upright (parallel to
the tibia) and the wooden dowel (or barbell) comfortably overhead (figure 14.29b).
5. The athlete performs a minimum of 5 repetitions, and the tester views the movement from the
side.
6. The assessment is qualitative and the goal is to assess the movement competency, with the
movement scored as pass/fail.
7. It is important that the athlete be warmed up and familiarized with the movement patterns to
increase the test validity.
FIGURE 14.29 (a) Starting position and (b) squat position for the overhead squat.
Body Composition
814

  35   SKINFOLD MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Skinfold calipers
Flexible tape measure
Marking pen
Personnel
One tester, one recorder
Procedure (Obtaining a Skinfold Measurement)
1. Skinfold measurements should be made on dry skin, before exercise, to ensure maximum
validity and reliability (70). The number of sites and equations should be selected based on the
population tested (see table 14.35 near the end of the chapter).
2. Grasp the skin firmly with the thumb and index finger to form a fold of skin and subcutaneous
fat.
3. Place the caliper prongs perpendicular to the fold 0.5 inch to 1 inch (approximately 1-2 cm)
from the thumb and index finger.
4. Release the caliper grip so that its spring tension is exerted on the skinfold.
5. Between 1 and 2 seconds after the grip on the caliper has been released, read the dial on the
caliper to the nearest 0.5 millimeter.
6. Obtain one measurement from each test site, and then repeat all test sites for a second trial. If
the measurements do not differ by more than 10%, average the two measurements to the
nearest 0.5 millimeter. Otherwise, take one or more additional measurements until two of the
measurements are within 10%, and average those two measurements to the nearest 0.5
millimeter.
Procedure (Measuring the Selected Site and Calculating the Body Fat Percentage)
1. There are specific equations for estimating body density (Db) (then, in turn, percent body fat
[%BF]) for different populations. First, select the equation appropriate for the athlete from
table 14.35 near the end of the chapter.
2. Refer to the chosen equation and related instructions and mark the skin at the appropriate
anatomical sites (69, 120):
Chest—a diagonal fold one-half the distance between the anterior axillary line and the
nipple for men (figure 14.30a)
Thigh—a vertical fold on the anterior aspect of the thigh, midway between the hip and
knee joints (figure 14.30b)
Abdomen—a vertical fold 1 inch (2.5 cm) to the right (relative to the athlete) of the
umbilicus (figure 14.30c)
Triceps—a vertical fold on the posterior midline of the upper arm (over the triceps muscle),
halfway between the acromion and the olecranon processes (the arm should be in
anatomical position with the elbow extended and relaxed [figure 14.30d])
Suprailium—a diagonal fold above the crest of the ilium at the spot where an imaginary line
would come down from the anterior axillary line (figure 14.30e) (some prefer the measure
to be taken more laterally, at the midaxillary line)
Midaxilla—a vertical fold on the midaxillary line at the level of the xiphoid process of the
sternum (figure 14.30f)
Subscapula—a fold taken on a diagonal line that extends from the vertebral border to a
point 0.5 inch to 1 inch (1 to 2 cm) from the inferior angle of the scapula (figure 14.30g)
815

Calf—a vertical fold along the medial side of the calf, at the level of maximum calf
circumference (figure 14.30h)
3. Using the appropriate population-specific equation from table 14.35, calculate the estimated
body density from the skinfolds (61).
4. Enter the body density into the appropriate population-specific equation from table 14.36 near
the end of the chapter to calculate the percent body fat from the body density (69).
5. Note that there are no universally accepted norms for body composition. When strength and
conditioning professionals assess an athlete’s body composition, they must account for a
standard error of the estimate (SEE) and report a range of percentages that the athlete falls
into. Note that the minimum SEE for population-specific skinfold equations is ±3% to ±5%.
Therefore, if a 25-year-old male athlete’s body fat is measured at 24%, there is a minimum of
a 6% range (21%-27%).
Note: Descriptive data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.30a Chest skinfold.
816

FIGURE 14.30b Thigh skinfold.
FIGURE 14.30c Abdomen skinfold.
817

FIGURE 14.30d Triceps skinfold.
FIGURE 14.30e Suprailium skinfold.
818

FIGURE 14.30f Midaxilla skinfold.
FIGURE 14.30g Subscapula skinfold.
819

FIGURE 14.30h Calf skinfold.
36   BIOELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE (BIA)
Equipment
BIA device
Personnel
One recorder
Procedure
1. Program the device with the athlete’s sex, weight, and height.
2. Have the athlete either hold the electrodes in the hands or stand barefoot on the electrodes
depending on the type of device.
3. Press the start button and wait the specified duration of time for that device (usually under 5
seconds).
4. From the measuring device, obtain and record the body composition measurements provided.
5. This means of evaluating body composition is best done under similar circumstances. To most
effectively monitor body composition changes, it is recommended that testing be done first
thing in the morning before the athlete has exercised, before food or water consumption, and
after having voided.
Note: Descriptive data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter.
Anthropometry
820

  37   GIRTH MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Flexible, spring-loaded tape measure (e.g., a Gulick tape)
Personnel
One tester, one recorder
Procedure
1. Position the athlete in a relaxed anatomical position for each measurement (unless otherwise
indicated for a particular measurement).
2. Measure the following sites (81); see figure 14.31:
Chest—at nipple level in males and at maximum circumference (above the breasts) in
females
Right upper arm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended,
palm up, and arm abducted to parallel with the floor
Right forearm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended, palm
up, and arm abducted to parallel with the floor
Waist (abdomen)—at the level of the umbilicus
Hips (buttocks)—at the maximal protrusion of the buttocks with the heels together
Right thigh—at the point of maximal circumference, usually just below the buttocks
Right calf—at the point of maximal circumference between the knee and ankle
FIGURE 14.31 Sites for girth measurements.
821

Statistical Evaluation of Test Data
Once the proper test or tests have been chosen and administered and the scores collected, the next
step may include any or all of the following: (1) analysis of the data to determine the change in
performance of the individuals or group over the training period (weeks, months, or years); (2)
analysis of the individual or group’s performance relative to that of similar individuals or groups
tested in the past; (3) analysis of the relationship of each athlete’s scores to those of the group;
and (4) comparison of individual scores to local, state, national, or international norms.
An important outcome of repeated performance testing is evaluation of both the improvement of
individual athletes and the overall effectiveness of the physical conditioning program as determined
by changes in test scores (103). A difference score is the difference between an athlete’s score at
the beginning and end of a training period or between any two separate testing times. The
percent change is another measure that can be used. However, evaluating the effectiveness of a
training program merely by degree of improvement has two major limitations. First, athletes who
begin the training period at a higher training status will not improve as much as untrained athletes
who perform poorly at the beginning of training (i.e., the principle of diminishing returns). The
window of adaptation for the various physical capacities is typically greater for less well-trained
athletes as well as measures of aerobic fitness (109). Second, athletes may deliberately fail to give
maximal effort on pretraining tests to inflate their pre- to posttraining improvement scores. It is
important to encourage athletes to give maximal effort on both the pre- and posttraining tests.
Types of Statistics
Statistics is the science of collecting, classifying, analyzing, and interpreting numerical data (27,
145). A working knowledge of statistics is helpful in making sound evaluations of test results.
Within statistics are different branches such as descriptive and inferential. Over the years, scientists
and practitioners in strength and conditioning have made increasing use of magnitude-based
approaches (through calculation of the effect size), which can be more meaningful because they
provide information regarding the magnitude of change that is practically meaningful to the athlete
in a given sport.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics summarizes or describes a large group of data. It is used when all the
information about a population is known. For example, if all the members of a team are tested,
statements can be made about the team with the use of descriptive statistics. There are three
categories of numerical measurement in descriptive statistics: central tendency, variability, and
percentile rank. In the sections that follow, these terms are defined, and examples of how to
calculate the values and scores are presented.
Central Tendency Measures of central tendency are values about which the data tend to
cluster. The three most common measures of central tendency (27, 145) are as follows:
Mean—the average of the scores (i.e., the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores).
This is the most commonly used measure of central tendency.
Median—the middlemost score when a set of scores is arranged in order of magnitude. With an
even number of scores, the median is the average of the two middlemost scores. Half a group of
scores falls above the median and half falls below the median. Depending on the distribution of
scores, the median can be a better measure of central tendency than the mean. This is
particularly true when very high or very low scores of one or a few members of the group tested
raise or lower the group mean to the extent that it does not adequately describe the ability of
most group members.
822

Mode—the score that occurs with the greatest frequency. If each numerical score appears only
once, there is no mode. If two or more scores are tied for greatest frequency, all of the similar
scores are modes. The mode is generally regarded as the least useful measure of central
tendency.
Variability The degree of dispersion of scores within a group is called variability. Two common
measures of variability are the range and the standard deviation. The range is the interval from
the lowest to the highest score. The advantage of the range is that it is easy to understand; the
disadvantage is that it uses only the two extreme scores and so may not be an accurate measure of
variability (145). For example, the range could be the same for a group of widely dispersed scores
as for a group of scores that are narrowly dispersed except for one deviant score. The standard
deviation is a measure of the variability of a set of scores about the mean. The formula for the
standard deviation of a sample is as follows:
SD=∑(x−x¯)2n−1  (14.1)
where Σ refers to a summation, x is a score, x is the mean of the scores, and n is the sample size
(number of scores). A relatively small standard deviation indicates that a set of scores is closely
clustered about the mean; a large standard deviation indicates wider dispersion of the scores about
the mean. The standard deviation is most useful when the group of scores is “normally distributed,”
forming the bell-shaped curve shown in figure 14.32 (26, 67).
The z-score can be used to express the distance of any individual score in standard deviation
(SD) units from the mean:
  z = (x − x) / SD    (14.2)
For example, if an athlete runs the 40-yard (37 m) sprint in 4.6 seconds and the mean and
standard deviation for the group tested are 5.00 and 0.33 seconds, respectively, equation 14.2 can
be applied to determine that the z-score for that athlete is −1.2. In other words, the athlete’s score
is 1.2 standard deviation units below (i.e., faster than) the group mean. Graphs can be a useful way
of representing z-scores visually. This can provide the strength and conditioning professional with a
comparison of different physical capacities and provide assistance with making decisions on which
weaknesses to target with a training program. In the example shown, the strength and conditioning
professional may decide to focus on improving endurance and flexibility while also improving body
composition (figure 14.33).
FIGURE 14.32 Normal bell curve.
823

FIGURE 14.33 Z-score column chart representing standardized test scores across different fitness tests for an individual athlete.
The zero represents the team average.
Percentile Rank An individual’s percentile rank is the percentage of test takers scoring below
that individual. As in calculation of the median, percentile ranking requires arranging scores
ordinally (lowest to highest). For example, if an athlete is ranked in the 75th percentile, 75% of the
group produced scores below that athlete’s score. Norms based on large samples are sometimes
expressed in evenly spaced percentiles. Several examples of percentile rank tables are shown in the
tables near the end of the chapter.
Inferential Versus Magnitude Statistics
The use of inferential statistics allows one to draw general conclusions about a population from
information collected in a population sample. For example, if a boys’ 9th-grade gym class is put
through a battery of tests and it is assumed that the class (sample) is representative of all the 9th-
grade boys in the school (the population), the results of these tests can be used to make inferences
about the population as a whole. A basic assumption of inferential statistics is that the sample is
truly representative of the population (27).
Magnitude statistics can provide a more useful approach for practitioners because it allows for
interpretation of the clinical significance of fitness testing (75). To describe and evaluate the
magnitude of change in a fitness test, measures such as smallest worthwhile change and effect size
are important.
Smallest worthwhile change refers to the ability of a test to detect the smallest practically
important change in performance. The ability to track changes with a fitness test depends on the
validity and reliability of that test. The smallest worthwhile change can be determined in a number
of ways, but it is typically calculated as 0.2 of the between-subjects standard deviation (75). For
example, if the standard deviation for a vertical jump test is 10 centimeters in a group of female
athletes, this would mean that the smallest worthwhile change for this group of athletes is 2
centimeters (0.2 × 10 cm).
824

Effect size is a statistic that can be useful for calculating group performance following a training
program or comparing between groups of athletes (42). The effect of the training program can be
calculated as the difference or change in the mean score as a proportion of the pretest standard
deviation (equation 14.3).
ES = (x posttest − x pretest) / SD pretest    (14.3)
For example, a group of athletes had a pretraining mean bench press 1RM of 104.5 kilograms
(standard deviation of 5.7 kg), and after a 12-week training intervention the mean bench press is
111.7 kilograms. The calculated effect size would be equal to (111.7 − 104.5) / 5.7 = 1.26.
Several scales have been provided to compare the magnitude of the effect (28, 103, 127), but
reference values for small (0.2), moderate (0.6), large (1.2), and very large (2.0) can be a useful
starting point for practitioners (42, 75). For the example just given, this would mean that the
strength and conditioning professional would interpret the effect size of 1.26 as meaning that the
training program had a large effect.
Developing an Athletic Profile
To determine the sport-specific training status of an athlete, the strength and conditioning
professional can combine the results of selected tests to generate an athletic profile, which is a
group of test results related to sport-specific abilities that are important for quality performance in a
sport or sport position. When evaluating athletes, the strength and conditioning professional should
follow these six steps:
1. Select tests that will measure the specific parameters most closely related to the physical
characteristics of the sport or sports in question. For example, a testing battery for wrestlers
should include tests for pulling strength, pushing strength, and local muscular endurance.
2. Choose valid and reliable tests to measure these parameters, and arrange the testing battery
in an appropriate order with sufficient rest between tests to promote test reliability (see
chapter 13 for more detail). For example, appropriate tests for wrestling might include push-
ups and sit-ups for maximum repetitions in a given time interval. These two tests should be
separated by at least 10 minutes of rest to allow recovery from fatigue and thus promote
accurate scores.
3. Administer the test battery with as many athletes as possible.
4. Determine the smallest worthwhile change for the tests and compare to normative data
where appropriate. It is recommended that coaches store testing results and develop their
own norms when standardized procedures are used.
5. Conduct repeat testing (e.g., pre- and posttraining program) and use the results to present a
visual profile with figures.
6. Use the results of the testing in some meaningful way. Ideally, the results will enable the
strength and conditioning professional to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the
athletes and to design the training program with these in mind.
825

Conclusion
Motor abilities and body composition variables that can be improved through strength and
conditioning programs include maximum muscular strength, maximum muscular power, anaerobic
capacity, local muscular endurance, aerobic capacity, agility, speed, flexibility, girths, percent body
fat, and lean body mass. Performance testing can be used to evaluate basic motor abilities as well
as the improvement of individual athletes over time and the overall effectiveness of a physical
conditioning program. Numerous tests are available to measure sport-specific physical capabilities
and training status. Strength and conditioning professionals can either use existing normative data
to evaluate athletic performance or develop their own normative data. Statistical measures of
central tendency, variability, percentile rank, smallest worthwhile change, effect size, and standard
scores are useful for evaluating physical abilities and the improvement of a group as well as the
individuals within the group.
KEY TERMS
aerobic capacity
aerobic power
agility
anaerobic capacity
anaerobic power
anthropometry
artificial intelligence (AI)
athletic motor skill competencies (AMSC)
athletic performance
athletic profile
balance
body composition
central tendency
descriptive statistics
difference score
effect size
flexibility
functional movement screen (FMS)
high-speed muscular strength
inferential statistics
local muscular endurance
low-speed muscular strength
machine learning (ML)
magnitude statistics
maximal anaerobic muscular power
mean
median
mode
percent change
percentile rank
principle of diminishing returns
procedures
protocols
826

range
reactive strength index
smallest worthwhile change
speed
stability
standard deviation
statistics
variability
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The maximal rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and glycolytic energy
system is known as
  a.  agility
  b.  anaerobic capacity
  c.  aerobic capacity
  d.  maximal strength
  2.  One of the following tests is not a test of agility or change of direction.
  a.  hexagon test
  b.  5-10-5 (pro agility) test
  c.  T-test
  d.  reactive strength index
  3.  Which of the following is a disqualification for the Nordic hamstring test?
  a.  allowing hip flexion rather than maintaining a straight line from the knees to the head
  b.  going too slow
  c.  allowing the ankles alone to contact the hooks when the athlete is using a dynamometer
  d.  maintaining tight core control
  4.  With an even number of scores, the ___________ is the average of the two middlemost
scores. Half a group of scores falls above this, and half falls below.
  a.  median
  b.  mode
  c.  average
  d.  variability
  5.  Which of the following tests is a measurement of anthropometry?
  a.  girth measurements
  b.  body composition
  c.  isometric mid-thigh pull
  d.  1RM power clean
TABLE 14.1 Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Female Collegiate Athletes
Percentile*
1RM bench press
1RM squat
1RM power clean
1RM bench press
1RM squat
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
BASKETBALL
SWIMMING
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
827

90
124
56
178
81
130
59
116
53
145
66
80
119
54
160
73
124
56
109
50
135
61
70
115
52
147
67
117
53
106
48
129
59
60
112
51
135
61
112
51
101
46
120
55
50
106
48
129
59
110
50
97
44
116
53
40
102
46
115
52
103
47
94
43
112
51
30
96
44
112
51
96
44
93
42
104
47
20
88
40
101
46
88
40
88
40
101
46
10
82
37
81
37
77
35
78
35
97
44
Mean
105
48
130
59
106
48
98
45
118
54
SD
18
8
42
19
20
9
15
7
19
9
n
120
86
85
42
35
Percentile*
SOFTBALL
VOLLEYBALL
90
117
53
184
84
122
55
113
51
185
84
80
108
49
170
77
115
52
108
49
171
78
70
104
47
148
67
106
48
104
47
165
75
60
99
45
139
63
100
45
100
45
153
70
50
95
43
126
57
94
43
98
45
143
65
40
90
41
120
55
93
42
96
44
136
62
30
85
39
112
51
88
40
90
41
126
57
20
80
36
94
43
80
36
85
39
112
51
10
69
31
76
35
71
32
79
36
98
45
Mean
94
43
130
59
97
44
97
44
144
65
SD
18
8
42
19
20
9
14
6
33
15
n
105
97
80
67
62
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
TABLE 14.2 Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in High School and College American Football Players
Percentile*
1RM bench press
1RM squat
1RM power
clean
1RM bench press
1RM squat
1RM power
clean
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
HIGH SCHOOL 14-15 YEARS
HIGH SCHOOL 16-18 YEARS
90
243
110
385
175
213
97
275
125
465
211
250
114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average
**Hoffman 2006 reported 365 lb (166 kg) for the 40% rank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
828

80
210
95
344
156
195
89
250
114
425
193
235
107
70
195
89
325
148
190
86
235
107
405
184
225
102
60
185
84
305
139
183
83
225
102
365
166
223
101
50
170
77
295
134
173
79
215
98
335
152
208
95
40
165
75
275
125
165
75
205
93
315
143
200
91
30
155
70
255
116
161
73
195
89
295
134
183
83
20
145
66
236
107
153
70
175
80
275
125
165
75
10
125
57
205
93
141
64
160
73
250
114
145
66
Mean
179
81
294
134
176
80
214
97
348
158
204
93
SD
45
20
73
33
32
15
44
20
88
40
43
20
n
214
170
180
339
249
284
Percentile*
NCAA DI
NCAA DIII
90
370
168
500
227
300
136
365
166
470
214
80
345
157
455
207
280
127
325
148
425
193
70
325
148
430
195
270
123
307
140
405
184
60
315
143
405
184
261
119
295
134
385
175
50
300
136
395
180
252
115
280
127
365
166
40
285
130
375
170
242
110
273
124
350**
159**
30
270
123
355
161
232
105
255
116
335
152
20
255
116
330
150
220
100
245
111
315
143
10
240
109
300
136
205
93
225
102
283
129
Mean
301
137
395
180
252
115
287
130
375
170
SD
53
24
77
35
38
17
57
26
75
34
n
1,189
1,074
1,017
591
588
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average
**Hoffman 2006 reported 365 lb (166 kg) for the 40% rank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.3 Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Male Baseball and Basketball Athletes
Percentile*
1RM bench press
1RM squat
1RM power clean
1RM bench press
1RM squat
1RM power
clean
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
BASEBALL
BASKETBALL
90
273
124
365
166
265
120
269
122
315
143
250
114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
829

80
260
118
324
147
239
109
250
114
305
139
235
107
70
247
112
310
141
225
102
240
109
295
134
230
105
60
239
109
293
133
216
98
230
105
280
127
220
100
50
225
102
270
123
206
94
225
102
265
120
215
98
40
218
99
265
120
200
91
216
98
245
111
205
93
30
203
92
247
112
190
86
210
95
225
102
195
89
20
194
88
237
107
182
83
195
89
195
89
180
82
10
175
80
218
99
162
74
185
84
166
75
162
74
Mean
227
103
281
128
210
95
225
102
251
114
209
95
SD
41
19
57
26
36
16
33
15
57
26
34
15
n
170
176
149
142
131
122
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average
lb = pounds, SD = standard deviation, n = sample size.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.4 1RM Squat, Bench Press, Power Clean, and Bench Pull
Descriptive Data* for Various Groups
Group, sport, or position
Number
of
athletes
Body weight
Squat
Bench press
Power clean
Bench pull
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
Group, sport, or position
Number
of
athletes
Body weight
Squat
Bench press
Power clean
Bench pull
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
lb
kg
National rugby league (7)
20
216.5
± 21.8
98.2 ±
9.9
385.8
± 59.5
175.0
± 27.3
State-level rugby league (7)
20
201.2
± 18.5
91.3 ±
8.4
329.8
± 30.9
149.6
± 14.3
National rugby league (8)
21
219.4
± 19.2
99.5 ±
8.7
315.0
± 33.5
142.7
± 15.2
State-level rugby league (8)
21
200.0
± 19.6
90.7 ±
8.9
258.8
± 35.9
117.4
± 16.3
National rugby league (5)
6
211.2
± 32.2
95.8 ±
14.6
332.5
± 2.6
150.8
± 10.7
National sailing—men (119)
11
215.6
± 27.6
97.8 ±
12.5
310.6
± 58.6
140.9
± 26.6
265.9
± 37.3
120.6
± 16.9
National
canoe/rowing/wrestling/judo—
men (129)
75
167.6
± 19.4
76.0 ±
8.8
199.0
± 35.9
90.3 ±
16.3
176.8
± 26.0
80.2 ±
11.8
National basketball—women
(140)
12
166.7
± 32.2
75.6 ±
14.6
173.2
± 6.6
78.6 ±
3.0
NCAA Division IA college
football—men (17)
963
310.4
140.8
NCAA Division IA college
football—men (17)
560
420.6
190.8
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
830

National softball—women (113)
10
158.1
± 24.5
71.7 ±
11.1
183.6
± 22.0
83.3 ±
10.0
National ice hockey—women
(123)
22
155.2
± 15.7
70.4 ±
7.1
144.0
± 27.0
65.3 ±
12.2
National soccer—men (149)
17
168.7
± 16.8
76.5 ±
7.6
378.5
± 46.7
171.7
± 21.2
National soccer—men (161)
14
169.5
± 13.9
76.9 ±
6.3
362.9
± 43.9
164.6
± 21.8
182.3
± 28.2
82.7 ±
12.8
National soccer—men (161)
15
169.6
± 16.3
76.8 ±
7.4
297.6
± 35.7
135.0
± 16.2
170.0
± 36.4
77.1 ±
16.5
NCAA Division IA college
football—men (114)
207
229.2
± 48.7
104.0
± 22.1
312.8
± 58.6
141.6
± 26.6
NCAA Division IA college
football—men (114)
88
226.0
± 14.3
102.5
± 6.5
267.4
±
33.1
121.3
± 15.0
NCAA Division IA college
football—men (114)
86
226.0
± 14.3
102.5
± 6.5
397.9
± 74.1
180.5
± 33.6
National handball—women (55)
16
152.7
± 18.1
69.3 ±
8.2
113.8
± 14.8
51.6 ±
6.7
National handball—men (54)
15
207.0
± 37.3
93.9 ±
16.9
235.7
± 25.6
106.9
± 11.6
Under 16 rugby league—men
(149)
30
165.8
± 24.5
75.2 ±
11.1
221.3
± 48.3
100.4
± 21.9
162.9
± 29.1
73.9 ±
13.2
156.3
± 22.3
70.9 ±
10.1
Under 17 rugby league—men
(149)
48
178.8
± 20.7
81.1 ±
9.4
269.4
± 41.2
122.2
± 18.7
205.7
± 29.5
93.3 ±
13.4
184.1
± 22.5
83.5 ±
10.2
Under 18 rugby league—men
(149)
55
188.1
± 22.0
85.3 ±
10.0
295.4
± 34.2
134.0
± 15.5
228.6
± 33.7
103.7
± 15.3
200.8
± 22.3
91.1 ±
10.1
Under 19 rugby league—men
(149)
45
195.8
± 21.8
88.8 ±
9.9
305.1
± 43.2
138.4
± 19.6
249.8
± 36.2
113.3
± 16.4
215.2
± 27.3
97.6 ±
12.4
Under 20 rugby league—men
(149)
26
196.0
± 18.7
88.9 ±
8.5
318.8
± 48.7
144.6
± 22.1
252.0
± 33.7
114.3
± 15.3
220.5
± 24.7
100.0
± 11.2
NCAA Division III lacrosse—
women (73)
11
132.3
± 11.0
60.0 ±
5.0
158.5
± 13.4
71.9 ±
6.1
96.8 ±
13.4
43.9 ±
6.1
National rugby league forwards
—men (102)
63
271.2
± 26.0
123.0
± 11.8
National rugby league backs—
men (102)
55
251.3
± 37.5
114.0
± 17.0
National rugby union—men (30)
30
236.1
± 22.3
107.1
± 10.1
351.6
± 58.0
159.5
± 26.3
308.6
± 35.9
140.0
± 16.3
National rugby union—women
(11)
15
157.9
± 21.8
71.6 ±
9.9
152.1
± 19.4
69.0 ±
8.8
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
TABLE 14.5 Descriptive Data* for Bench Press, Back Squat, Vertical Jump,
and Standing Long Jump in Female NCAA Division III Athletes
Sport
Bench press (kg)
Back squat (kg)
Vertical jump (cm)
Standing long jump (cm)
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
Adapted by permission from B. Guthrie, J.B. Fields, B. Thompson, and M.T. Jone, “Physical Performance Assessments of Strength
and Power in Women Collegiate Athletes,” International Journal of Exercise Science 14, no. 6 (2021): 984-993.
831

Field hockey
43.9 ± 7.4
78.4 ± 16.44
44.1 ± 6.5
174.4 ± 16.5
Softball
46.1 ± 9.5
83.8 ± 17.9
52.5 ± 4.5
191.4 ± 11.9
Soccer
42.9 ± 7.9
72.5 ± 13.9
46.2 ± 6.3
178.1 ± 16.5
Volleyball
42.7 ± 7.5
76.1 ± 14.0
50.8 ± 7.2
N/A
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
Adapted by permission from B. Guthrie, J.B. Fields, B. Thompson, and M.T. Jone, “Physical Performance Assessments of Strength
and Power in Women Collegiate Athletes,” International Journal of Exercise Science 14, no. 6 (2021): 984-993.
TABLE 14.6 Descriptive Percentile Values for Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull Peak
Force, Relative Peak Force, and Rate of Force Development for Male Senior
and Junior Soccer Players of National and Regional Standard
Percentile
Age group
Level of competition
Peak force
Relative peak
force
Rate of force development (0-
250 ms)
(N)
(N/kg)
(N/s)
100
Senior
National (n = 25)
3,698
46.7
6,814
Regional (n = 24)
3,702
49.8
7,237
Junior
National (n = 32)
3,714
51.4
6,387
Regional (n = 30)
3,296
42.1
6,603
75
Senior
National (n = 25)
3,089
42.1
5,588
Regional (n = 24)
2,995
42.4
5,113
Junior
National (n = 32)
2,965
41.0
5,457
Regional (n = 30)
2,749
38.7
4,466
50
Senior
National (n = 25)
2,917
38.6
5,171
Regional (n = 24)
2,595
38.9
4,005
Junior
National (n = 32)
2,737
39.4
4,676
Regional (n = 30)
2,347
35.9
3,902
25
Senior
National (n = 25)
2,725
36.8
4,876
Regional (n = 24)
2,486
35.0
3,573
Junior
National (n = 32)
2,504
38.0
4,394
Regional (n = 30)
2,153
33.1
3,534
0
Senior
National (n = 25)
2,262
33.0
2,221
Regional (n = 24)
2,264
28.1
2,429
Junior
National (n = 32)
2,284
35.7
2,721
Regional (n = 30)
1,960
30.8
1,987
Reprinted by permission from M.A. Soriano, V. Paredes, P. Comfort, et al., “’You Are Not Wrong About Getting Strong:’ An Insight
Into the Impact of Age Group and Level of Competition on Strength in Spanish Football Players,” International Journal of Sports
Physiology and Performance 19, no. 7 (2024): 633.
TABLE 14.7 Normative Data for Nordic Hamstring Test
832

Group
Absolute maximal eccentric Nordic
strength (Mean ± SD, n)
Relative maximal eccentric Nordic strength
(Mean ± SD, n ∙ kg−1)
FOOTBALL (n = 174)
276.29 ± 74.76
4.95 ± 0.95
ATHLETICS (n = 123)
289.73 ± 94.60
4.62 ± 1.01
Sprints (n = 27)
347.00 ± 83.54
5.07 ± 1.10
Endurance (n = 40)
283.85 ± 75.20
4.90 ± 0.86
Jumps (n = 15)
320.17 ± 74.36
4.58 ± 0.87
Throws (n = 5)
417.70 ± 83.92
4.14 ± 0.85
Development (n = 28)
234.93 ± 74.16
4.18 ± 0.91
Foundation (n = 8)
180.69 ± 98.19
3.58 ± 0.86
MULTI-SPORTS (n =
40)
240.74 ± 77.64
4.30 ± 1.21
Fencing (n = 16)
226.42 ± 71.54
4.13 ± 1.16
Gymnastics (n = 6)
209.18 ± 57.05
3.69 ± 0.98
Squash (n = 12)
303.46 ± 75.22
5.17 ± 1.12
Table tennis (n = 6)
189.71 ± 41.07
3.58 ± 1.02
TOTAL (n = 337)
276.97 ± 83.92
4.74 ± 1.03
Reprinted by permission from E. Jeanguyot, B. Salcinovic, A. Johnson, et al., “Eccentric Hamstring Strength in Young Athletes Is
Best Documented When Normalised to Body Mass: A Cross-Sectional Study With Normative Data of 590 Athletes From Different Age
Categories,” Biology of Sport 40, no. 4 (2023): 1079-1095. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
TABLE 14.8 Norms for Standing Long Jump in Elite Male and Female Athletes
Percentile*
Males
Females
in.
cm
in.
cm
90
133
339
115
293
80
122
309
110
279
70
116
294
104
264
60
110
279
98
249
50
104
264
92
234
40
98
249
86
219
30
92
234
80
204
20
86
219
74
189
10
80
204
69
174
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu, Explosive Power and Strength (Human Kinetics, 1996).
TABLE 14.9 Rankings for Standing Long Jump in 15- and 16-Year-Old Male
and Female Athletes
Category
Males
Females
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu, Explosive Power and Strength (Human Kinetics, 1996).
833

in.
cm
in.
cm
Excellent
79
201
65
166
Above average
73
186
61
156
Average
69
176
57
146
Below average
65
165
53
135
Poor
<65
<165
<53
<135
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu, Explosive Power and Strength (Human Kinetics, 1996).
TABLE 14.10 Vertical Jump, Static Jump, and Broad Jump Descriptive Data*
for Various Groups
Group, sport, or position
Number of
athletes
Vertical jump
Static jump
Broad jump
in.
cm
in.
cm
in.
cm
College soccer—women (154)
51
16.1 ±
2.2
40.9 ±
5.6
High school soccer—women (154)
83
15.6 ±
1.9
39.6 ±
4.8
College lacrosse—women (143)
79
15.8 ±
2.2
40.1 ±
5.6
Under 18 Gaelic football—men (34)
265
17.0 ±
2.0
43.1 ±
5.1
78.0 ±
8.1
198.1 ±
20.6
National soccer—women (26)
21
12.4 ±
1.6
31.5 ±
4.0
11.9 ±
1.5
30.2 ±
3.8
Under 19 soccer—women (26)
20
13.5 ±
1.5
34.3 ±
3.8
12.9 ±
1.1
32.8 ±
2.8
Under 17 soccer—women (26)
21
11.4 ±
0.8
29.0 ±
2.0
11.1 ±
1.0
28.2 ±
2.5
Under 21 soccer—men (26)
18
15.9 ±
1.7
40.4 ±
4.3
14.6 ±
1.5
37.1 ±
3.8
Under 20 soccer—men (26)
17
15.8 ±
1.9
40.1 ±
4.8
15.0 ±
1.9
38.1 ±
4.8
Under 17 soccer—men (26)
21
16.1 ±
2.0
40.9 ±
5.1
14.7 ±
1.9
37.3 ±
4.8
Division I Spain soccer—women (132)
100
10.3 ±
1.9
26.2 ±
4.8
National ice hockey—women (123)
23
19.8 ±
2.2
50.3 ±
5.6#
84.6 ±
4.3
214.9 ±
10.9
National soccer—women (65)
85
12.1 ±
1.6
30.7 ±
4.1
Division I Norway soccer—women (65)
47
11.1 ±
1.6
28.2 ±
4.1
Ice hockey National Hockey League
draftees—men (24)
853
24.4 ±
3.0
62.0 ±
7.6#
100.0 ±
7.0
254.0 ±
17.8
College wrestling—men (144)
20
20.5 ±
3.1
52.1 ±
7.9#
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
#Jumps performed with an arm swing.
834

National weightlifting—men (46)
6
23.9 ±
1.5
60.7 ±
3.8
National soccer—men (160)
17
22.2 ±
1.6
56.4 ±
4.1
National soccer—men (161)
14
22.3 ±
2.6
56.6 ±
6.6
National soccer—men (161)
15
20.9 ±
1.6
53.1 ±
4.1
National soccer—men (141)
270
17.8 ±
0.7
45.2 ±
1.8
17.4 ±
0.5
44.2 ±
1.3
National handball—women (55)
16
15.1 ±
1.7
38.4 ±
4.3
National handball—men (53)
15
19.0 ±
2.8
48.3 ±
7.1
Under 16 rugby league—men (149)
67
18.0 ±
2.0
45.7 ±
5.1
NCAA Division I football—men (45)
193
28.7 ±
3.7
72.9 ±
9.4#
NCAA Division II football—men (45)
181
27.3 ±
3.3
69.3 ±
8.4#
NCAA Division III football—men (45)
131
26.5 ±
3.5
67.3 ±
8.9#
Under 20 rugby league—men (149)
25
20.8 ±
2.1
52.8 ±
5.3
High school volleyball—women (131)
27
18.5 ±
3.3
47.0 ±
8.4#
NCAA Division I volleyball—women (131)
26
20.8 ±
2.5
52.8 ±
6.4#
Professional rugby league (148)
70
16.2 ±
2.8
41.1 ±
7.1
Amateur rugby league (148)
249
15.4 ±
1.9
39.1 ±
4.8
Academy rugby league (148)
261
15.7 ±
1.9
39.9 ±
4.8
National rugby league forwards—men (30)
12
14.7 ±
1.7
37.3 ±
4.3
National rugby league backs—men (30)
6
15.9 ±
2.5
40.4 ±
6.4
National rugby league—men (49)
26
20.0 ±
2.9
50.8 ±
7.4#
National rugby league—men (48)
58
24.7 ±
2.2
62.7 ±
5.6#
National rugby union—men (33)
30
101.6 ±
7.9
258.1 ±
20.1
National rugby union—women (11)
15
15.0 ±
1.6
38.1 ±
4.1
13.8 ±
1.2
35.1 ±
3.0
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
#Jumps performed with an arm swing.
835

High school track and field—women (107)
8
83.4 ±
6.3
211.8 ±
16.0
NCAA Division I soccer—women (97)
15
12.2 ±
2.0
31.0 ±
5.1
57.9 ±
4.3
147.1 ±
10.9
High school rugby league—men (147)
302
16.3 ±
2.1
41.4 ±
5.3
Junior national volleyball—men (47)
14
21.5 ±
0.9
54.6 ±
2.3#
Junior national volleyball—women (47)
15
18.0 ±
0.6
45.7 ±
1.5#
Under 18 Australian rules football—men
(164)
177
23.9 ±
2.2
60.7 ±
5.6#
NCAA Division I lacrosse—women (142)
84
15.8 ±
2.2
40.1 ±
5.6
NCAA Division I soccer—men (136)
27
24.3 ±
2.8
61.7 ±
7.1#
National soccer—women (1)
17
12.0 ±
0.5
30.5 ±
1.3
National soccer—women (108)
17
12.8 ±
1.5
32.5 ±
3.8
National soccer—men (108)
17
17.2 ±
0.9
43.7 ±
2.3
National junior soccer—women (108)
17
11.2 ±
0.8
28.4 ±
2.0
National junior soccer—men (108)
17
17.3 ±
1.9
43.9 ±
4.8
National soccer—men (2)
214
15.4 ±
2.0
39.1 ±
5.1
14.8 ±
1.9
37.6 ±
4.8
NCAA Division I college basketball—men
(121)
16
17.1 ±
0.4
43.4 ±
1.9
NCAA Division I college basketball forwards
—men (16)
37
16.2 ±
2.2
41.1 ±
5.6
NCAA Division I college basketball guards
—men (16)
55
17.2 ±
2.4
43.7 ±
6.1
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
#Jumps performed with an arm swing.
TABLE 14.11 Rebound Jump Descriptive Data* for Various Groups
Population
Jump height (cm)
RSI avg
RSI max
Device
NCAA Division I college basketball forwards—men
31.1 ± 1.5^
1.40 ± 0.08^
1.47 ± 0.08
FP
Intercounty hurlers—men
31.3 ± 4.1
1.72 ± 0.34
—
OPTO
Intercounty Gaelic football players—women
26.3 ± 4.3
1.47 ± 0.28
—
OPTO
Club Gaelic football players—women
23.1 ± 4.3
1.22 ± 0.27
—
OPTO
RSI = reactive strength index; Avg = average; FP = force plate; OPTO = optoelectronic device. ^ = average values taken from the
top 3 best repetitions rather than the top 5.
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
Adapted from Brady et al. (2024); Hughes et al. (2024); Parchmann and McBride (2011).
836

TABLE 14.12 Margaria-Kalamen Stair Sprint Test Guidelines (Watts)
Category
Age groups (years)
15-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
Over 50
MEN
Excellent
Over 2,197
Over 2,059
Over 1,648
Over 1,226
Over 961
Good
1,844-2,197
1,726-2,059
1,383-1,648
1,040-1,226
814-961
Average
1,471-1,824
1,373-1,716
1,098-1,373
834-1,030
647-804
Fair
1,108-1,461
1,040-1,363
834-1,088
637-824
490-637
Poor
Under 1,108
Under 1,040
Under 834
Under 637
Under 490
WOMEN
Excellent
Over 1,785
Over 1,648
Over 1,226
Over 961
Over 736
Good
1,491-1,785
1,383-1,648
1,040-1,226
814-961
608-736
Average
1,187-1,481
1,098-1,373
834-1,030
647-804
481-598
Fair
902-1,177
834-1,089
637-824
490-637
373-471
Poor
Under 902
Under 834
Under 637
Under 490
Under 373
Adapted by permission from E. Fox, R. Bowers, and M. Foss, The Physiological Basis for Exercise and Sport, 5th ed. (Brown &
Benchmark ,1993), 676; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
TABLE 14.13 Velocity-Based Training Normative Data for Barbell Velocity
Absolute strength
Accelerative strength
Strength-speed
Speed-strength
Starting strength
% 1RM
80%-100%
60%-80%
40%-60%
20%-40%
Body weight to
20%
Lower body speed
range
<0.50 m/s
0.50-0.75 m/s
0.75-1.0 m/s
1.0-1.3 m/s
>1.3 m/s
Upper body speed
range
<0.40 m/s
0.40-0.60 m/s
0.60-0.85 m/s
0.85-1.1 m/s
>1.1 m/s
Reprinted by permission from J.B. Mann, Developing Explosive Athletes: Use of Velocity Based Training in Training Athletes, 4th ed.
(Ultimate Athlete Concepts, 2021).
TABLE 14.14 Descriptive Data* for 300-Yard (274 m) Shuttle Test
Group, sport, or position
Number of athletes
Time (s)
High school volleyball—women (131)
27
68.0 ± 6.3
NCAA Division 1 volleyball—women (131)
26
67.7 ± 3.8
National soccer—men (142)
18
56.7 ± 1.7
Recreational athletes—men and women (157)
81
72.8 ± 9.1
National badminton—men (155)
12
73.3 ± 3.4
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
TABLE 14.15 Repetition Benchmarks for the 90-Second Box Jump Test
Age
14-15
16-17
18-20
FEMALE
Target goal
73-75
80-85
82-89
Reprinted by permission from Alpine Canada Alpin, Fall 2022 Alpine Canada Alpin Fitness Combine Version 1.3 (Alpine Canada Alpin,
2022), 60.
837

Good
67-72
75-79
76-82
Developing
51-66
60-74
70-75
Needs training
≤50
≤59
≤69
MALE
Target goal
74-85
92-97
95-100
Good
67-73
85-91
87-94
Developing
62-66
73-84
75-86
Needs training
≤61
≤72
≤74
Reprinted by permission from Alpine Canada Alpin, Fall 2022 Alpine Canada Alpin Fitness Combine Version 1.3 (Alpine Canada Alpin,
2022), 60.
TABLE 14.16 Percentiles by Age Groups and Sex for Partial Curl-Up
Percentile*
Age and sex
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
90
75
70
75
55
75
55
74
48
53
50
80
56
45
69
43
75
42
60
30
33
30
70
41
37
46
34
67
33
45
23
26
24
60
31
32
36
28
51
28
35
16
19
19
50
27
27
31
21
39
25
27
9
16
13
40
24
21
26
15
31
20
23
2
9
9
30
20
17
19
12
26
14
19
0
6
3
20
13
12
13
0
21
5
13
0
0
0
10
4
5
0
0
13
0
0
0
0
0
*Descriptors for percentile rankings: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average.
Reprinted by permission from American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 12th
ed., edited by O. Cemal (Wolters Kluwer, 2026), 101.
TABLE 14.17 Fitness Categories by Age Groups and Sex for Push-Ups
Category
Age and sex
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Excellent
36
30
30
27
25
24
21
21
18
17
Very good
35
29
29
26
24
23
20
20
17
16
29
21
22
20
17
15
13
11
11
12
Good
28
20
21
19
16
14
12
10
10
11
22
15
17
13
13
11
10
7
8
5
Fair
21
14
16
12
12
10
9
6
7
4
17
10
12
8
10
5
7
2
5
2
Canadian Physical Activity Training for Health (CSEP-PATH®), 3rd Edition. © 2021 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology
(csep.ca/csep-path). Reprinted with permission.
838

Needs improvement
16
9
11
7
9
4
6
1
4
1
Canadian Physical Activity Training for Health (CSEP-PATH®), 3rd Edition. © 2021 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology
(csep.ca/csep-path). Reprinted with permission.
TABLE 14.18 Normative Data for the AFT Hand-Release Push-Up
17-21
22-26
27-31
32-36
37-41
42-46
47-51
52-56
57-61
Over 61
POINTS
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
POINTS
100
57
53
61
50
62
48
60
47
59
41
56
36
55
35
51
30
46
24
43
24
100
99
56
50
60
49
59
45
59
46
57
39
55
34
53
34
48
28
43
23
41
23
99
98
54
47
57
46
56
42
56
43
54
36
53
31
50
31
45
26
40
22
39
22
98
97
53
45
54
43
55
39
54
40
53
34
50
30
47
30
43
25
38
21
37
21
97
96
51
43
53
42
53
38
53
37
51
33
48
28
44
27
40
24
37
20
35
20
96
95
50
42
52
39
52
36
52
36
48
31
46
26
42
25
38
23
35
19
34
19
95
94
49
39
50
37
51
35
50
35
46
28
44
24
41
24
35
22
34
18
33
18
94
93
48
--
49
36
49
34
48
34
45
27
43
23
39
23
34
20
33
--
31
--
93
92
47
38
48
35
48
33
47
32
44
26
42
22
38
22
33
19
31
17
30
17
92
91
46
37
47
34
47
32
45
31
43
23
41
21
36
21
32
18
30
16
29
16
91
90
45
36
46
33
46
30
44
30
42
22
38
20
34
20
31
17
29
15
26
15
90
89
44
35
45
32
45
28
43
28
41
--
37
--
33
19
30
--
26
14
24
14
89
88
43
34
44
31
44
27
42
26
39
21
36
19
--
18
28
16
25
--
--
--
88
87
42
33
43
30
43
26
41
25
38
--
34
18
32
--
27
15
24
--
23
--
87
86
41
32
42
28
42
25
40
--
37
20
33
17
31
17
26
--
23
--
--
13
86
85
--
31
41
27
41
--
39
24
34
--
32
16
30
16
25
14
--
--
22
--
85
84
40
30
40
26
40
24
38
--
33
19
--
--
29
15
24
--
22
13
21
--
84
83
39
29
38
25
38
23
36
23
32
18
31
15
28
14
23
--
21
--
20
--
83
82
38
28
37
24
37
22
34
--
--
17
30
--
27
--
--
13
20
--
19
--
82
81
--
--
--
--
36
--
33
22
31
--
29
14
25
13
22
--
19
--
18
--
81
80
37
27
35
--
35
21
--
19
30
16
28
--
23
--
21
--
18
--
17
--
80
79
36
26
34
23
34
20
32
--
29
15
27
13
22
--
20
--
--
--
16
12
79
78
35
25
33
22
33
19
--
18
28
14
26
--
--
--
19
--
17
--
--
--
78
77
34
24
32
21
32
18
31
--
27
--
25
--
21
--
18
--
--
12
15
--
77
76
33
23
31
19
--
17
30
--
26
13
23
--
--
--
17
--
16
--
14
--
76
75
32
22
--
--
31
--
29
17
25
--
22
--
20
--
--
--
15
--
--
--
75
74
--
21
--
18
30
16
28
16
24
--
21
--
19
12
16
12
--
--
13
--
74
73
31
--
30
--
29
--
26
15
23
--
20
12
18
--
--
--
14
--
--
--
73
72
30
20
27
17
27
15
24
14
22
12
--
--
17
--
15
--
--
--
--
--
72
71
29
19
26
16
26
--
23
--
21
--
19
--
16
--
14
--
13
--
12
--
71
70
28
18
25
15
23
14
22
13
20
--
18
--
15
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
70
Reprinted from U.S. Army, “Army Fitness Test Score Tables: Hand-release Push-Up (HRP) (number of correctly performed repetitions
in 2 minutes),” last modified June 1, 2025. Before consulting the above table, check for the latest update at: https://www
.army.mil/e2/downloads/rv7/aft/AFT_Scoring_Scales_250601.pdf.
839

69
27
17
22
14
21
--
21
--
19
--
17
--
14
--
13
--
--
--
--
11
69
68
25
16
21
13
--
13
20
--
17
--
16
--
13
--
--
--
12
--
11
--
68
67
24
--
--
--
--
--
19
--
16
11
15
11
--
11
12
11
--
11
--
--
67
66
23
15
20
--
20
--
17
12
15
--
14
--
12
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
66
65
22
14
17
12
18
12
16
--
14
--
13
--
--
--
--
--
11
--
--
--
65
64
20
13
16
--
16
--
14
11
13
--
12
--
--
--
11
--
--
--
--
--
64
63
17
--
14
--
14
11
13
--
12
--
--
--
11
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
63
62
16
12
13
11
12
--
12
--
--
--
11
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
62
61
13
11
12
--
11
--
11
--
11
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
61
60
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
60
Reprinted from U.S. Army, “Army Fitness Test Score Tables: Hand-release Push-Up (HRP) (number of correctly performed repetitions
in 2 minutes),” last modified June 1, 2025. Before consulting the above table, check for the latest update at: https://www
.army.mil/e2/downloads/rv7/aft/AFT_Scoring_Scales_250601.pdf.
TABLE 14.19 YMCA Bench Press Norms
Percentile*
Age and sex
18-25
26-35
36-45
46-55
56-65
>65
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
90
44
42
41
40
36
33
28
29
24
24
20
18
80
37
34
33
32
29
28
22
22
20
20
14
14
70
33
28
29
28
25
24
20
18
14
14
10
10
60
29
25
26
24
22
21
16
14
12
12
10
8
50
26
21
22
21
20
17
13
12
10
9
8
6
40
22
18
20
17
17
14
11
9
8
6
6
4
30
20
16
17
14
14
12
9
7
5
5
4
3
20
16
12
13
12
10
8
6
5
3
3
2
1
10
10
6
9
6
6
4
2
1
1
1
1
0
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below average
Score is the number of repetitions completed in 1 minute using an 80-pound (36 kg) barbell for men and a 35-pound (16 kg)
barbell for women.
Adapted from YMCA (2000).
TABLE 14.20 Descriptive Data for the Star Excursion Balance Test
Score
High school
Collegiate
ANT (%)
69.9 ± 7.9
70.3 ± 7.1
PM (%)*
83.5 ± 10.2
86.7 ± 10.7
ANT = Anterior
PM = Posteromedial
PL = Posterolateral
COMP = Composite
*Statistically significant difference between groups (N ≤ 0.05)
Reprinted by permission from R.S. McCann, K.B. Kosik, M.Q. Beard, et al., “Variations in Star Excursion Balance Test Performance
Between High School and Collegiate Football Players,” The Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 29, no. 10 (2015): 2765-
2770.
840

PL (%)*
72.8 ± 11.4
77.1 ± 10.2
COMP (%)*
75.4 ± 8.5
78.0 ± 7.4
ANT = Anterior
PM = Posteromedial
PL = Posterolateral
COMP = Composite
*Statistically significant difference between groups (N ≤ 0.05)
Reprinted by permission from R.S. McCann, K.B. Kosik, M.Q. Beard, et al., “Variations in Star Excursion Balance Test Performance
Between High School and Collegiate Football Players,” The Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 29, no. 10 (2015): 2765-
2770.
TABLE 14.21 Normalized Reach Distance on the Star Excursion Balance Test
for Each Limb, by Team
Sex/Sport Anterior Posterolateral Posteromedial Composite
Anterior Posterolateral Posteromedial Composite
WOMEN
DOMINANT LIMB
NONDOMINANT LIMB
Basketball
64.3 ±
6.9
88.7 ± 8.0
100.2 ± 7.1
84.4 ± 6.5
63.4 ±
7.9
85.7 ± 8.4
101.5 ± 7.7
83.5 ± 7.0
(61.2,
67.4)
(85.1, 92.4)
(97.0, 103.5)
(81.5, 87.4)
(59.8,
67.0)
(81.8, 89.6)
(98.0, 105.0)
(80.3, 86.7)
Golf
69.4 ±
5.5
86.5 ± 10.2
105.3 ± 10.0
87.0 ± 7.7
67.6 ±
4.4
85.9 ± 8.7
102.2 ± 7.8
85.2 ± 6.2
(65.4,
73.3)
(79.2, 93.8)
(98.2, 112.4)
(81.5, 92.6)
(64.5,
70.8)
(79.7, 92.1)
(96.7, 107.8)
(80.8, 89.7)
Hockey
66.6 ±
7.3
93.1 ± 10.7
110.3 ± 10.7
90.0 ± 8.6
67.0 ±
6.9
93.0 ± 11.0
113.1 ± 7.6
91.0 ± 7.5
(64.1,
69.1)
(89.5, 96.8)
(106.7, 114.0)
(87.1, 92.9)
(64.6,
69.3)
(89.2, 96.7)
(110.5, 115.6)
(88.5, 93.5)
Soccer
66.8 ±
5.3
88.7 ± 8.8
104.3 ± 8.0
86.6 ± 6.3
67.4 ±
5.2
90.2 ± 9.9
105.3 ± 8.1
87.7 ± 6.7
(65.1,
68.5)
(85.9, 91.5)
(101.8, 106.8)
(84.6, 88.6)
(65.8,
69.1)
(89.1, 93.3)
(102.8, 107.9)
(85.5, 89.8)
Softball
63.5 ±
5.6
87.0 ± 11.3
100.7 ± 8.8
83.7 ± 7.5
63.9 ±
4.8
85.3 ± 9.2
99.6 ± 9.3
82.9 ± 6.3
(61.2,
65.9)
(82.4, 91.6)
(97.1, 104.3)
(80.6, 86.9)
(61.9,
65.8)
(81.5, 89.1)
(95.7, 103.4)
(80.3, 85.5)
Volleyball
66.8 ±
7.1
86.6 ± 10.4
102.7 ± 10.5
85.4 ± 8.5
65.3 ±
5.4
88.4 ± 9.5
102.3 ± 7.9
85.3 ± 6.9
(63.6,
69.9)
(82.0, 91.2)
(98.1, 107.4)
(81.6, 89.2)
(62.9,
67.7)
(84.2, 92.6)
(98.8, 105.9)
(82.3, 88.4)
MEN
DOMINANT LIMB
NONDOMINANT LIMB
Basketball
61.8 ±
4.3
86.6 ± 11.6
99.2 ± 7.8
82.5 ± 5.9
61.6 ±
4.8
86.9 ± 13.0
97.9 ± 7.9
82.1 ± 6.5
(59.6,
64.1)
(80.6, 92.5)
(95.2, 103.2)
(79.5, 85.6)
(59.2,
64.1)
(80.2, 93.6)
(93.9, 102.0)
(78.8, 85.5)
*Values are mean ± SD (95% confidence interval) percent limb length.
Reprinted by permission from M.R. Stiffler, J.L. Sanfilippo, M.A. Brooks, and B.C. Heiderscheit, “Star Excursion Balance Test
Performance Varies by Sport in Healthy Division I Collegiate Athlete,” Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy 45, no. 10
(2015): 775.
841

Golf
65.1 ±
6.2
83.9 ± 12.1
103.7 ± 9.0
84.2 ± 8.5
68.2 ±
4.7
85.3 ± 10.2
106.0 ± 7.2
86.5 ± 5.9
(61.2,
69.1)
(76.2, 92.6)
(98.0, 109.4)
(78.9, 89.6)
(65.2,
71.2)
(78.9, 91.8)
(101.4, 110.6)
(82.8, 90.2)
Hockey
67.3 ±
5.2
95.6 ± 9.5
110.9 ± 5.5
91.3 ± 5.0
67.6 ±
4.0
96.6 ± 10.6
111.2 ± 5.7
91.8 ± 5.6
(65.6,
69.0)
(92.5, 98.7)
(109.2, 112.7)
(89.6, 92.9)
(66.3,
68.9)
(93.2, 100.1)
(109.4, 113.0)
(90.0, 93.6)
Soccer
62.7 ±
4.9
89.9 ± 7.7
103.5 ± 8.6
85.4 ± 5.5
62.9 ±
5.0
89.9 ± 8.3
104.2 ± 8.8
85.7 ± 5.9
(61.1,
64.2)
(87.5, 92.4)
(100.8, 106.2)
(83.6, 87.1)
(61.3,
64.5)
(87.3, 92.5)
(101.4, 107.0)
(83.8, 87.5)
Football
62.2 ±
8.2
88.6 ± 12.9
99.8 ± 8.7
83.5 ± 7.9
61.9 ±
7.3
87.9 ± 13.0
99.8 ± 8.9
83.2 ± 8.0
(60.4,
64.0)
(85.8, 91.5)
(97.9, 101.7)
(81.8, 85.3)
(60.3,
63.5)
(85.1, 90.8)
(97.9, 101.8)
(81.4, 85.0)
Wrestling
66.7 ±
6.7
91.1 ± 11.9
110.3 ± 11.1
89.4 ± 8.2
67.8 ±
8.2
90.8 ± 10.3
111.0 ± 12.3
89.9 ± 8.3
(64.7,
68.7)
(87.6, 94.6)
(107.0, 113.5)
(87.0, 91.8)
(65.4,
70.2)
(87.8, 93.8)
(107.4, 114.6)
(87.4, 92.3)
*Values are mean ± SD (95% confidence interval) percent limb length.
Reprinted by permission from M.R. Stiffler, J.L. Sanfilippo, M.A. Brooks, and B.C. Heiderscheit, “Star Excursion Balance Test
Performance Varies by Sport in Healthy Division I Collegiate Athlete,” Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy 45, no. 10
(2015): 775.
TABLE 14.22 Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 20-
to 29-Year-Old Males
Percentilea
V̇O2max (mL · kg−1 · min−1)
1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:s
Sit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%)
in.
cm
99
60.5
8:29
4.2
90
54.0
9:34
22
55.9
7.9
80
51.1
10:09
20
50.8
10.5
70
47.5
10:59
19
48.3
12.6
60
45.6
11:29
18
45.7
14.8
50
43.9
11:58
17
43.2
16.6
40
41.7
12:38
15
38.1
18.6
30
39.9
13:15
14
35.6
20.7
20
38.0
14:00
13
33.0
23.3
10
34.7
15:30
11
27.9
26.6
01
26.5
20:58
33.4
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and reach for 18- to 25-year-old men.
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine (2014).
842

TABLE 14.23 Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 20-
to 29-Year-Old Females
Percentilea
V̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)
1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:s
Sit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%)
in.
cm
99
54.5
9:30
11.4
90
46.8
11:10
24
61.0
15.1
80
43.9
11:58
22
55.9
16.8
70
41.1
12:51
21
53.3
18.4
60
39.5
13:24
20
50.8
19.8
50
37.8
14:04
19
48.3
21.5
40
36.1
14:50
18
45.7
23.4
30
34.1
15:46
17
43.2
25.5
20
32.3
16:46
16
40.6
28.2
10
29.5
18:33
14
35.6
33.5
01
23.7
23:58
38.6
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and reach for 18- to 25-year-old women.
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.24 Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 30-
to 39-Year-Old Males
Percentilea
V̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)
1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:s
Sit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%)
in.
cm
99
58.3
8:49
7.3
90
51.7
10:01
21
53.3
12.4
80
48.3
10:46
19
48.3
14.9
70
46.0
11:22
18
45.7
16.8
60
44.1
11:54
17
43.2
18.4
50
42.4
12:24
15
38.1
20.0
40
40.7
12:58
14
35.6
21.6
30
38.7
13:44
13
33.0
23.2
20
36.7
14:34
11
27.9
25.1
10
33.8
15:57
9
22.9
27.8
01
26.5
20:58
34.4
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and reach for 26- to 35-year-old men.
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine (2014).
843

TABLE 14.25 Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 30-
to 39-Year-Old Females
Percentilea
V̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)
1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:s
Sit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%)
in.
cm
99
52.0
9:58
11.2
90
45.3
11:33
23
58.4
15.5
80
42.4
12:24
22
55.9
17.5
70
39.6
13:24
21
53.3
19.2
60
37.7
14:08
20
50.8
21.0
50
36.7
14:34
19
48.3
22.8
40
34.2
15:43
17
43.2
24.8
30
32.4
16:42
16
40.6
26.9
20
30.9
17:38
15
38.1
29.6
10
28.0
19:43
13
33.0
33.6
01
22.9
24:56
39.0
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and reach for 26- to 35-year-old women.
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.26 V̇O2max Descriptive Data for Athletes in Various Sports
Category
Typical V̇O2max of athletes playing the sport (ml · kg−1 ·
min−1)
Sport
Males
Females
Extremely
high
70+
60+
Cross-country skiing
Middle-distance running
Long-distance running
Very high
63-69
54-59
Bicycling
Rowing
Racewalking
High
57-62
49-53
Soccer
Middle-distance swimming
Canoe racing
Handball
Racquetball
Speedskating
Figure skating
Downhill skiing
Wrestling
Above
average
52-56
44-48
Basketball
Ballet dancing
American football (offensive, defensive
backs)
Gymnastics
Hockey
Horse racing (jockey)
Data from Nieman (1995).
844

Sprint swimming
Tennis
Sprint running
Jumping
Average
44-51
35-43
Baseball, softball
American football (linemen, quarterbacks)
Shot put
Discus throw
Weightlifting
Bodybuilding
Data from Nieman (1995).
TABLE 14.27 Percentile Ranks for the 12-Minute Run
Percentile*
Age (years) and distance
20-29
30-39
40-49
km
miles
km
miles
km
miles
MEN
90
2.90
1.80
2.82
1.75
2.72
1.69
80
2.78
1.73
2.67
1.66
2.57
1.60
70
2.62
1.63
2.56
1.59
2.46
1.53
60
2.54
1.58
2.48
1.54
2.40
1.49
50
2.46
1.53
2.40
1.49
2.30
1.43
40
2.37
1.47
2.32
1.44
2.22
1.38
30
2.29
1.42
2.24
1.39
2.14
1.33
20
2.20
1.37
2.14
1.33
2.06
1.28
10
2.06
1.28
2.01
1.25
1.95
1.21
WOMEN
90
2.59
1.61
2.53
1.57
2.43
1.51
80
2.46
1.53
2.40
1.49
2.27
1.41
70
2.35
1.46
2.27
1.41
2.20
1.37
60
2.27
1.41
2.19
1.36
2.11
1.31
50
2.20
1.37
2.14
1.33
2.04
1.27
40
2.12
1.32
2.04
1.27
1.96
1.22
30
2.03
1.26
1.95
1.21
1.90
1.18
20
1.95
1.21
1.88
1.17
1.82
1.13
10
1.82
1.13
1.75
1.09
1.70
1.05
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.28 Descriptive Data* for Yo-Yo Intermittent Recovery Test for
Various Populations
Group, sport, or position
Number of athletes
Yo-Yo IR1
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
845

Distance (m)
Distance (yd)
National soccer—men (106)
18
2,260 ± 80
2,472 ± 87
National soccer—men (106)
24
2,040 ± 60
2,231 ± 66
National rugby league—men (4)
23
1,656 ± 403
1,811 ± 441
Semi-professional rugby league—men (4)
27
1,564 ± 415
1,710 ± 454
National soccer—women (108)
17
1,224 ± 255
1,339 ± 279
National soccer—men (108)
17
2,414 ± 456
2,640 ± 499
National junior soccer—women (108)
17
826 ± 160
903 ± 175
National junior soccer—men (108)
17
2,092 ± 260
2,288 ± 284
Under 17 soccer—men (37)
60
1,556 ± 478
1,702 ± 523
Under 16 rugby union—men (117)
150
1,150 ± 403
1,258 ± 441
Under 14 elite basketball—men (152)
15
1,100 ± 385
1,203 ± 421
Under 15 elite basketball—men (152)
15
1,283 ± 461
1,403 ± 504
Under 17 elite basketball—men (152)
17
1,412 ± 245
1,544 ± 268
Under 18 Gaelic football—men (34)
265
1,465 ± 370
1,602 ± 405
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
846

847

FIGURE 14.34 30-15 IFT performance among athletes of different ages, sports, and playing standards: (a) male and (b) female.
Adapted by permission from Buchheit, M, Dikmen, U, and Vassallo, C. The 30-15 intermittent fitness test—two decades of learnings. SPSR 148:1-13, 2021.
TABLE 14.29 Descriptive Data* for Change-of-Direction Tests for Various
Populations
Group, sport, or position
Number of athletes
Time (s)
5-10-5
T-test
5-0-5
Hexagon
College soccer—women (154)
51
4.88 ± 0.20
High school soccer—women (154)
83
4.91 ± 0.22
College lacrosse—women (154)
79
4.99 ± 0.24
National softball—women (112)
10
2.66 ± 0.14
National basketball—women (140)
12
2.69 ± 0.28
College students—women (130)
34
11.92 ± 0.52
College students—men (130)
52
10.08 ± 0.46
NCAA Division II college soccer—men (93)
12
4.80 ± 0.33
Recreational athletes—women (143)
20
5.23 ± 0.25
11.70 ± 0.67
Recreational athletes—men (143)
24
4.67 ± 0.21
10.31 ± 0.46
High school rugby league—men (142)
70
2.42 ± 0.12
High school rugby league—men (50)
28
2.30 ± 0.13
High school rugby league—men (147)
302
2.49 ± 0.14
High school rugby league—men (147)
870
2.51 ± 0.15
Junior national volleyball—men (47)
14
9.90 ± 0.17
Junior national volleyball—women (47)
15
10.33 ± 0.13
NCAA Division I college lacrosse—women (153)
84
4.99 ± 0.23
NCAA Division III college lacrosse—women (73)
11
4.92 ± 0.22
10.50 ± 0.60
MLB baseball—men (74)
62
4.42 ± 0.90
AAA baseball—men (74)
52
4.53 ± 0.20
AA baseball—men (74)
50
4.42 ± 0.68
A baseball—men (74)
84
4.48 ± 0.54
Rookie baseball—men (74)
90
4.54 ± 0.19
High school volleyball—women (131)
27
10.96 ± 0.58
NCAA Division I volleyball—women (131)
26
10.65 ± 0.52
Recreational athletes—women (118)
52
12.52 ± 0.90
13.21 ± 1.68
Recreational athletes—men (118)
58
10.49 ± 0.89
12.33 ± 1.47
College athletes—women (118)
56
10.94 ± 0.60
12.87 ± 1.48
College athletes—women (118)
47
9.94 ± 0.50
12.29 ± 1.39
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
TABLE 14.30 Percentile Ranks for the 5-10-5 (Previously Pro Agility) Test
(Seconds) in NCAA Division I College Athletes
848

Percentile*
Women’s
volleyball
Women’s
basketball
Women’s
softball
Men’s
basketball
Men’s
baseball
Men’s American
football
90
4.75
4.65
4.88
4.22
4.25
4.21
80
4.84
4.82
4.96
4.29
4.36
4.31
70
4.91
4.86
5.03
4.35
4.41
4.38
60
4.98
4.94
5.10
4.39
4.46
4.44
50
5.01
5.06
5.17
4.41
4.50
4.52
40
5.08
5.10
5.24
4.44
4.55
4.59
30
5.17
5.14
5.33
4.48
4.61
4.66
20
5.23
5.23
5.40
4.51
4.69
4.76
10
5.32
5.36
5.55
4.61
4.76
4.89
Mean
5.03
5.02
5.19
4.41
4.53
4.54
SD
0.20
0.26
0.26
0.18
0.23
0.27
n
81
128
118
97
165
869
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Data collected using electronic timing devices. SD = standard deviation, n = number of athletes.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
TABLE 14.31 Descriptive Data for the Illinois Test: Boys 14 to 16 Years
Evaluation
Limits
%
Number of people included in the group
High
<15.83 s
2.28
0
Above average
15.83-16.93 s
13.59
4
Average
16.94-19.13 s
68.27
12
Below average
19.14-20.23 s
13.59
3
Low
>20.23 s
2.28
1
Reprinted by permission from Z. Boyan and V. Batchev, “Investigation on the ‘Agility’ Skill at 14- to 16-Year Old Students by Illinois
Agility Test,” National Sports Academy ‘Vasil Levski’ (2019): 444. https://doi.org/10.37393/icass2019/82.
TABLE 14.32 Descriptive Data for the Illinois Test: Boys and Girls 16 to 19
Years
Evaluation
Sex
Male
Female
Excellent
<15.2 s
<17.0 s
Above average
15.2-16.1 s
17.0-17.9 s
Average
16.2-18.1 s
18.0-21.7 s
Below average
18.2-18.3 s
21.8-23.0 s
Low
>18.3 s
>23.0 s
TABLE 14.33 Descriptive Data* for Speed Testing for Various Populations
Group, sport, or position
Number of athletes
Time (s)
10 m
20 m
40 m
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
849

College soccer—women (154)
51
3.38 ± 0.17
5.99 ± 0.29
High school soccer—women (154)
83
3.33 ± 0.15
5.94 ± 0.28
College lacrosse—women (154)
79
3.37 ± 0.14
5.97 ± 0.27
NCAA Division I college soccer—women (97)
15
2.31 ± 0.25
Under 16 rugby league—men (149)
67
1.82 ± 0.07
3.13 ± 0.00
Under 17 rugby league—men (149)
50
1.81 ± 0.06
3.12 ± 0.10
Under 18 rugby league—men (149)
56
1.80 ± 0.06
3.09 ± 0.10
Under 19 rugby league—men (149)
89
1.82 ± 0.07
3.11 ± 0.12
Under 20 rugby league—men (149)
22
1.79 ± 0.06
3.07 ± 0.12
National soccer—men (149)
17
1.82 ± 0.30
3.00 ± 0.30
National rugby league—men (7)
20
1.61 ± 0.06
5.15 ± 0.02
State rugby league—men (7)
20
1.66 ± 0.06
5.13 ± 0.02
National rugby league forwards—men (30)
12
1.66 ± 0.20
3.00 ± 0.08
National rugby league backs—men (30)
6
1.65 ± 0.15
2.91 ± 0.10
State rugby league—men (50)
26
2.06 ± 0.18
3.36 ± 0.23
5.83 ± 0.31
National rugby union—men (33)
30
1.69 ± 0.10
2.93 ± 0.20
National rugby league forwards—men (102)
63
5.27 ± 0.19
National rugby league backs—men (102)
55
5.08 ± 0.20
National badminton—men (155)
12
1.94 ± 0.18
3.35 ± 0.30
National rugby league—men (48)
58
1.73 ± 0.07
5.25 ± 0.17
Under 18 elite rugby league—men (50)
28
1.81 ± 0.08
3.11 ± 0.12
5.56 ± 0.22
Under 18 sub-elite rugby league—men (50)
36
1.94 ± 0.11
3.28 ± 0.18
5.83 ± 0.35
High school rugby league—men (147)
302
1.88 ± 0.12
3.23 ± 0.16
High school rugby league—men (147)
870
1.90 ± 0.12
3.27 ± 0.19
Junior national volleyball—women (47)
20
1.90 ± 0.01
Junior national volleyball—men (47)
14
1.80 ± 0.02
Under 18 Australian rules football—men (164)
177
3.13 ± 0.09
NCAA Division III college soccer—men (93)
12
1.96 ± 0.11
5.79 ± 0.31
NCAA Division I college soccer—men (136)
27
1.70 ± 0.10
4.90 ± 0.20
National Australian rules football—men (163)
35
1.89 ± 0.07
3.13 ± 0.10
5.40 ± 0.17
National Australian rules football—men (163)
30
1.70 ± 0.06
2.94 ± 0.08
National soccer—women (65)
85
1.67 ± 0.07
National soccer—women (65)
47
1.70 ± 0.07
National soccer—women (1)
17
3.17 ± 0.03
National soccer—men (141)
270
2.27 ± 0.40
3.38 ± 0.70
Under 18 Gaelic football—men (34)
265
3.22 ± 0.15
Group, sport, or position
Number of athletes
Time (s)
10 yd
20 yd
40 yd
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
850

NCAA Division I college lacrosse—women (153)
1.99 ± 0.10
3.37 ± 0.14
5.97 ± 0.26
MLB baseball—men (74)
62
1.52 ± 0.10
AAA baseball—men (74)
52
1.55 ± 0.09
NCAA Division I football—men (45)
281
4.88 ± 0.27
NCAA Division II football—men (45)
282
4.92 ± 0.26
NCAA Division III football—men (45)
205
4.96 ± 0.27
*The values listed are means ± standard deviation. The data should be regarded as only descriptive, not normative.
TABLE 14.34 Normative Data for the Balance Error Scoring System Test
Age
Women
Men
20-29
11.9 ± 5.1
10.4 ± 4.4
30-39
11.4 ± 5.6
11.5 ± 5.5
40-49
12.7 ± 6.9
12.4 ± 5.7
50-54
15.1 ± 8.2
13.6 ± 6.9
55-59
16.7 ± 8.2
16.4 ± 7.2
60-64
19.3 ± 8.8
17.2 ± 7.1
65-69
19.9 ± 6.6
20.0 ± 7.3
Adapted from Iverson and Koehle (2013).
TABLE 14.35 Equations for Calculating Estimated Body Density From
Skinfold Measurements Among Various Populations
SKF sitesa
Population
subgroups
Sex
Age
Equation
Reference
Σ7SKF (chest + abdomen + triceps +
subscapular + suprailiac + midaxilla +
thigh)
Black or Hispanic
Women
18-55 years
Db (g/cc)b = 1.0970
− 0.00046971
(Σ7SKF)
+ 0.00000056
(Σ7SKF)2
− 0.00012828 (age)
Jackson et al.
(82)
Σ7SKF (chest + abdomen + triceps +
subscapular + suprailiac + midaxilla +
thigh)
Black or athletes
Men
18-61 years
Db (g/cc)b = 1.1120
− 0.00043499
(Σ7SKF)
+ 0.00000055
(Σ7SKF)2
− 0.00028826 (age)
Jackson and
Pollock (80)
Σ4SKF (triceps + anterior suprailiac +
abdomen + thigh)
Athletes
Women
18-29 years
Db (g/cc)b =
1.096095
− 0.0006952
(Σ4SKF)
− 0.0000011
(Σ4SKF)2
− 0.0000714 (age)
Jackson et al.
(82)
a∑SKF = sum of skinfolds (mm); Db = body density.
bUse population-specific conversion formulas (see table 14.36) to calculate %BF from Db.
cMale athletes = 1; female athletes = 0.
dBlack athletes = 1; white athletes = 0.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner, and V.H. Heyward, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
851

Σ3SKF (triceps + suprailiac + thigh)
White or
anorexic
Women
18-55 years
Db (g/cc)b =
1.0994921
− 0.0009929
(Σ3SKF)
+ 0.0000023
(Σ3SKF)2
− 0.0001392 (age)
Jackson et al.
(82)
Σ3SKF (chest + abdomen + thigh)
White
Men
18-61 years
Db (g/cc)b =
1.109380
− 0.0008267
(Σ3SKF)
+ 0.0000016
(Σ3SKF)2
− 0.0002574 (age)
Jackson and
Pollock (82)
Σ2SKF (triceps + calf)
Black or white
Boys
6-17 years
%BF = 0.735
(Σ2SKF) + 1.0
Slaughter et al.
(137)
Σ2SKF (triceps + calf)
Black or white
Girls
6-17 years
%BF = 0.610
(Σ2SKF) + 5.1
Slaughter et al.
(137)
Suprailiac, triceps
Athletes
Women
High school
and college age
Db (g/cc)b = 1.0764
− (0.00081 ×
suprailiac)
− (0.00088 ×
triceps)
Sloan and Weir
(138)
Thigh, subscapular
Athletes
Men
High school
and college age
Db (g/cc)b = 1.1043
− (0.00133 × thigh)
− (0.00131 ×
subscapular)
Sloan and Weir
(138)
Σ3SKF (triceps + abdomen + thigh)
Athletes
Men or
women
18-34 years
%BF = 8.997 +
0.24658 (S3SKF)
− 6.343 (genderc)
− 1.998 (raced)
Evans et al. (41)
a∑SKF = sum of skinfolds (mm); Db = body density.
bUse population-specific conversion formulas (see table 14.36) to calculate %BF from Db.
cMale athletes = 1; female athletes = 0.
dBlack athletes = 1; white athletes = 0.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner, and V.H. Heyward, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
TABLE 14.36 Population-Specific Two-Component Model Formulas for
Converting Body Density to Percent Body Fat
Population
Age (yr)
Sex
%BFa
FFBd (g· cc−1)b
RACE OR ETHNICITY
African American
9-17
Female
(5.24/Db) − 4.82
1.088
19-45
Male
(4.86/Db) − 4.39
1.106
24-79
Female
(4.85/Db) − 4.39
1.106
American Indian
18-62
Male
(4.97/Db) − 4.52
1.099
FFBd = fat-free body density; Db = body density; %BF = percent body fat; NA = no data available for this population subgroup.
aMultiply value by 100 to calculate %BF.
bFFBd based on average values reported in selected research articles.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner, and V.H. Heyward, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
852

18-60
Female
(4.81/Db) − 4.34
1.108
Japanese Native
18-48
Male
(4.97/Db) − 4.52
1.099
Female
(4.76/Db) − 4.28
1.111
61-78
Male
(4.87/Db) − 4.41
1.105
Female
(4.95/Db) − 4.50
1.100
Singaporean (Chinese, Indian, Malay)
Male
(4.94/Db) − 4.48
1.102
Female
(4.84/Db) − 4.37
1.107
White
8-12
Male
(5.27/Db) − 4.85
1.086
Female
(5.27/Db) − 4.85
1.086
13-17
Male
(5.12/Db) − 4.69
1.092
Female
(5.19/Db) − 4.76
1.090
18-59
Male
(4.95/Db) − 4.50
1.100
Female
(4.96/Db) − 4.51
1.101
60-90
Male
(4.97/Db) − 4.52
1.099
Female
(5.02/Db) − 4.57
1.098
Hispanic
20-40
Male
NA
NA
Female
(4.87/Db) − 4.41
1.105
ATHLETES
Resistance trained
24 ± 4
Male
(5.21/Db) − 4.78
1.089
35 ± 6
Female
(4.97/Db) − 4.52
1.099
Aerobic endurance trained
21 ± 2
Male
(5.03/Db) − 4.59
1.097
21 ± 4
Female
(4.95/Db) − 4.50
1.100
All sports
18-22
Male
(5.12/Db) − 4.68
1.093
18-22
Female
(4.97/Db) − 4.52
1.099
CLINICAL POPULATIONS
Anorexia nervosa
15-44
Female
(4.96/Db) − 4.51
1.101
Obesity
17-62
Female
(4.95/Db) − 4.50
1.100
Spinal cord injury (paraplegic or quadriplegic)
18-73
Male
(4.67/Db) − 4.18
1.116
Female
(4.70/Db) − 4.22
1.114
FFBd = fat-free body density; Db = body density; %BF = percent body fat; NA = no data available for this population subgroup.
aMultiply value by 100 to calculate %BF.
bFFBd based on average values reported in selected research articles.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner, and V.H. Heyward, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
TABLE 14.37 Percent Body Fat Descriptive Data for Athletes in Various
Sports
Classification
Typical percent body fat of athletes playing the
sport
Sport
Males
Females
Data from D.C. Nieman, Fitness and Sports Medicine: A Health-Related Approach, 3rd ed. (Bull Pub. Co., 1995).
853
