CHAPTER 18
PROGRAM DESIGN FOR
RESISTANCE TRAINING
Timothy J. Suchomel, PhD, and Paul Comfort, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jeremy M. Sheppard, N. Travis
Triplett, Thomas R. Baechle, Roger W. Earle, and Dan Wathen to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
evaluate the requirements and characteristics of a sport and assess an
athlete for the purpose of designing a resistance training program;
select exercises based on type, specificity, technique experience,
equipment availability, and time availability;
determine training frequency based on training status, sport season (i.e.,
phase of the season), load, exercise type, and other concurrent exercise;
arrange exercises in a training session according to their type;
determine 1-repetition maximum (1RM), predicted 1RM from a multiple
RM, and RM loads;
assign load and repetitions based on the training goal;
know when and by how much an exercise load should be increased;
assign training volumes according to the athlete’s training status and the
training goal; and
determine rest period lengths based on the training goal.
Effective training programs involve the coordination of many variables in a
sequential and systematic fashion that enables the body to appropriately adapt
to specific exercise stimuli and subsequently improve performance. Having a
basic understanding of the physiological responses to various training stimuli is
essential for the strength and conditioning professional to be able to coordinate
the various training aspects successfully. When focusing on the resistance
1186

training component of a comprehensive training program, it is helpful to
approach the task one program element at a time, keeping in mind the primary
principles of anaerobic exercise prescription.
1187

Principles of Anaerobic Exercise Prescription
Resistance training programs for athletic populations require attention to the
principles of specificity, overload, progression, variation, reversibility, and
individualization. One of the most basic concepts to incorporate in all training
programs is specificity. The term, first suggested by DeLorme in 1945 (39),
refers to the method whereby an athlete is trained in a specific manner to
produce a specific adaptation or training outcome. In the case of resistance
training, specificity refers to aspects such as the muscles involved, the muscle
action (e.g., concentric, eccentric, and isometric), and the movement velocity
and coordination (i.e., movement pattern; this does not mean replicating specific
sporting movements), but it does not always reflect the combination of all these
aspects. Importantly, it does not mean that all aspects of the training must
directly mimic that of the sporting skill. For example, a squat movement is
relevant to the vertical jump because it involves overcoming resistance in a
similar movement pattern (e.g., combined knee and hip flexion followed by
forceful knee and hip extension) and engages muscles (i.e., predominantly the
knee and hip extensors) that are involved in the vertical jump, yet the speed of
movement and force application are disparate between the squat and vertical
jump. Sometimes used interchangeably with specificity is the acronym SAID,
which stands for specific adaptation to imposed demands. The underlying
principle is that the type of demand placed on the body dictates the type of
adaptation that will occur. For instance, athletes training for power in high-speed
movements (e.g., baseball pitch or tennis serve) should attempt to activate or
recruit the same motor units required by their sport at the highest velocity
possible (160, 163). Additionally, specific improvements in force and velocity
characteristics may occur following heavy or ballistic resistance training, with
greater improvements in power production occurring in response to strength
training targeting increases in maximal strength in weak athletes (26, 28, 29).
Specificity also relates to the athlete’s sport season. As an athlete progresses
through the preseason, in-season, and postseason, all forms of training should
gradually progress in an organized manner from general to specific (159).
Although participation in the sport itself provides the greatest opportunity to
improve performance in the sport, the proper application of the specificity
principle certainly increases the likelihood that other training will also positively
contribute to performance via the transference of training adaptations in the
gym to the sport-specific skills.
Overload refers to the application of a training stimulus that exceeds what
the athlete is accustomed to (i.e., increased load, sets, or repetitions [i.e.,
volume]) and produces an adaptation beyond the baseline abilities of the
1188

athlete. Without an overload stimulus, even an otherwise well-designed program
greatly limits an athlete’s ability to make improvements. The obvious application
of this principle in the design of resistance training programs involves increasing
the loads assigned in the exercises, especially if the primary training goal is to
improve maximal strength. Other more subtle changes include altering the
number of training sessions per week (or per day in some instances) or
increasing training volume by adding exercises or sets, which may preferentially
stimulate a hypertrophic response (96, 143). Alternatively, varying exercise
choice, modifying rest periods between sets and exercises, or any combination
of these can result in an overload. The basis of the overload principle is to
provide the body with a unique training stimulus to facilitate the development of
the desired adaptations. Although an overload stimulus is typically thought of as
an increase of a given training variable (e.g., load, volume, velocity), a
reduction in these variables may also provide the opportunity for adaptation to
take place. For example, a reduction in intensity (i.e., relative load) allows for an
increase in the speed of a movement, thus facilitating the development of rapid
force production characteristics (i.e., speed–strength). Alternatively, a reduction
in training volume while maintaining (or increasing) intensity during a deload
week may lead to an enhancement in performance (figure 18.1) if a sufficient
stimulus (i.e., volume and intensity) has been applied previously. When the
overload principle is properly and systematically applied, and all other
components of training are considered (e.g., skill-based technical and tactical
training, conditioning, and external stressors), overtraining can be avoided and
the desired training adaptation will occur.
1189

FIGURE 18.1 Example of changes in fatigue and performance (i.e., fitness-fatigue paradigm) across a
mesocycle with a deload week. As the volume load increases across the first three weeks; some
accumulation of fatigue occurs. Only once there is a reduction in volume load, during the deload week,
does the increased performance manifest.
If a training program is to continue producing higher levels of performance,
the intensity or volume (i.e., overload) of training must continue to provide a
unique stimulus. Progression, when applied properly, with loading or volume
being sequential and specific to the desired adaptive response, promotes long-
term training benefits. Although it is customary to focus only on the resistance
used (i.e., intensity), one can progressively increase training volume by raising
the number of weekly training sessions, adding more drills or exercises to each
session, increasing the number of sets performed, or changing the type or
technical requirements of the drills or exercises. For example, an athlete may
progress from the front squat and clean grip shoulder shrug to learning the hang
power clean and eventually the power clean through the use of a sequential
application of various training exercises that segment the key positions
associated with the lift (21). A key factor governing how training progression is
applied is that it must be based on the athlete’s training needs and training
status and it needs to be introduced systematically and gradually. It is also
worth noting that progressively increasing volume tends to emphasize
hypertrophic adaptations, whereas increasing intensity emphasizes strength-
related adaptations (35, 97, 125, 144).
1190

Variation within resistance training programs focuses on removing linearity
by manipulating overload and specificity to promote the desired adaptations. For
example, strength and conditioning professionals may introduce variation into a
training program by modifying volume, intensity, set configuration, rest periods,
and exercise selection to provide a novel overload stimulus. These modifications
to a training program may help reduce training monotony while also potentially
reducing fatigue and providing a range of training stimuli. Regarding training
intensity, strength–power characteristics have been developed within training
programs that include more variation compared to prescribing constant
repetition ranges with a greater or fewer number of sets and training or not
training to failure (121, 195, 196). Moreover, it has been suggested that maximal
and rapid force production may be improved to a greater extent using a
combination of heavy and light training intensities compared to performing only
one loading method (68, 118, 189).
Strength and conditioning professionals can add variation to a training
program at both the macro and micro level in several ways. At the macro level,
implementing a periodized training plan may help develop specific fitness
characteristics (e.g., hypertrophy, strength, and power) at different times
throughout the training year. This in turn may provide athletes with a variety of
training stimuli and potentially enhance the adaptations in subsequent training
phases. Within each phase of training strength and conditioning professionals
can make micro-level adjustments and add variation by modifying training
intensities and exercise selection, thereby reducing training monotony and
offering unique training stimuli.
As mentioned previously, the introduction of an overload stimulus is meant to
promote the development of a desired fitness characteristic. However, the
removal or reduction of a training stimulus or the involution from monotonous
training and poor fatigue management may cause the opposite to occur; this
deterioration or loss of fitness characteristics refers to the principle of
reversibility. An example of the deterioration of a fitness characteristic after
the removal of a training stimulus is the reduction in rapid force production that
may occur during a higher volume phase focused on improving muscle
hypertrophy (98, 164). However, the opposite may also occur because a loss in
muscle size (i.e., muscle atrophy) may occur when training volume is reduced
during a taper (7, 188). As such, reversibility may be considered a product of
programming variation because different fitness characteristics are emphasized
during various times throughout the training year. Regarding involution, a
plateau or decreased performance may result because of a lack of mechanical
variation (52) or appropriate loading (176). For example, maximal strength
adaptations may plateau if a similar training program with small progressions in
1191

loading is prescribed for longer than six weeks (186). Involution related to poor
fatigue management may be the product of nonfunctional overreaching without
the inclusion of proper recovery, however (54, 55). While the loss of fitness
characteristics could be mitigated by incorporating retaining loads (i.e., small
percentage of overall training volume focused on maintaining a desired
characteristic) (42), it is important that strength and conditioning professionals
understand the difference between retaining loads and the minimal effective
dose needed to maintain or develop a fitness characteristic.
The training goals and needs of each athlete are unique and should therefore
command a training program suited specifically for them; this training principle is
termed individualization. Athletes competing in different sports, the same
sport, or in different events come with different genetic characteristics and
training histories that affect how they respond to various training stimuli. As
such, strength and conditioning professionals should always avoid a cookie
cutter approach to designing training programs and should instead focus on
providing individualized training programs that help each athlete reach their
training goals. While this may seem simplistic, it is important to note that many
aspects of different training programs may be similar or even identical. For
example, general strength characteristics for the lower body may be addressed
by prescribing one of many core exercises such as the back squat, leg press,
hex-bar deadlift, and so on (figure 18.2); however, a training program focused
on this fitness characteristic will likely have more than one lower body exercise,
and thus the likelihood of overlap between programs is high. Taking this into
consideration, strength and conditioning professionals may find that 80% to
90% of the exercises used in a training program are similar for multiple athletes,
while 10% to 20% of the exercises will be individualized. It is important to note
that the loads programmed for these exercises are always individualized to each
athlete’s capabilities.
1192

FIGURE 18.2 Exercise selection flow chart for lower body (a) strength and (b) power. Note: The
displayed exercises are examples and do not comprise an exhaustive list.
Designing a resistance training program is a complex process that requires
the recognition and manipulation of seven program design variables (referred
to in this chapter as steps 1 through 7).
This chapter discusses each variable in the context of three scenarios that
enable the strength and conditioning professional to see how training principles
and program design guidelines can be integrated into an overall program.
1. Needs analysis
2. Exercise selection
3. Training frequency
4. Exercise order
5. Training load and repetitions
6. Volume
7. Rest periods
Athlete Scenarios
The three scenarios include a basketball center (scenario A) in her in-season, an American football offensive
lineman (scenario B) during his off-season, and a cross country runner (scenario C) during his preseason. It
is understood that in each scenario, the athlete is well conditioned for his or her sport, has no
musculoskeletal dysfunction, and has been cleared for training and competition by the sports medicine
staff. The athletes in scenarios A (basketball center) and B (American football lineman) have been
resistance training since high school, are accustomed to lifting heavy loads, and are skilled in machine and
free weight exercises. The high school cross country runner in scenario C, in contrast, began a resistance
training program in the preseason only four weeks ago, so his training is limited, and his exercise technique
skills are not well developed.
1193

Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Sex
Female
Sex
Male
Sex
Male
Age
20 years old
Age
28 years old
Age
17 years old
Sport
Collegiate basketball
Sport
Professional American
football
Sport
High school cross country
running
Position Center
Position Offensive lineman
Position (Not applicable)
Season
Beginning of the in-
season
Season
Beginning of the off-
season
Season
Beginning of the
preseason
1194

Step 1: Needs Analysis
The strength and conditioning professional’s initial task is to perform a needs
analysis, a two-stage process that includes an evaluation of the requirements
and characteristics of the sport and an assessment of the athlete.
Evaluation of the Sport
The first task in a needs analysis is to determine the unique characteristics of
the sport, which includes the general physiological and biomechanical profile,
common injuries and mechanisms of injury, and position-specific attributes. This
information enables the strength and conditioning professional to design a
program specific to those requirements and characteristics. Although this task
can be approached in several ways, it should at least include consideration of
the following attributes of the sport (50, 128):
Body 
and 
limb 
movement 
patterns 
and 
muscular 
involvement
(movement analysis)
Strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular endurance priorities
(physiological analysis)
Common sites for joint and muscle injury and causative factors (injury
analysis), especially for non-contact injuries
Other characteristics of a sport—such as cardiovascular endurance, speed,
agility, and flexibility requirements—should also be evaluated. This chapter,
however, focuses only on the physiological outcomes that specifically relate to
resistance training program design: strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular
endurance.
For example, a movement analysis of the shot-put field event reveals that it is
an all-body movement that begins with the athlete in a semi-crouched stance,
with many joints flexed and adducted, and culminates in an upright stance with
many joints extended and abducted. The most heavily recruited muscles (not in
order) are the elbow extensors (triceps brachii), shoulder abductors (deltoids),
hip extensors (gluteals, hamstrings), knee extensors (quadriceps), and ankle
plantar flexors (soleus, gastrocnemius). Physiologically, shot putting requires
high levels of strength and power for a successful performance. Also, enhanced
muscular hypertrophy may be advantageous since the muscle’s potential to
produce force increases as its cross-sectional area becomes greater (81, 102).
The muscular endurance requirement is minimal, however. Due to the repetitive
nature of training and competition, the muscles and tendons surrounding the
shoulder and elbow joints tend to be injured due to overuse (192).
1195

Alternatively, increased hypertrophy may be beneficial for force production, as
well as for collision and contact-based sports (e.g., American football or rugby)
as a protective mechanism against impacts, and to increase the athletes’
momentum (momentum = mass × velocity) to improve outcomes in collisions.
For example, if any reduction in speed is disproportionately lower than the
increase in muscle mass, the collision sport athlete will be able to generate
greater momentum, likely making him or her more difficult to stop or tackle. In
contrast, excessive hypertrophy may negatively affect the performance of
endurance-based athletes due to the requirement to carry extra mass for longer
durations (13). Despite being in the same sport (i.e., athletics) as a shot-put
thrower, a distance athlete requires a substantial amount of cardiovascular and
muscle endurance within his or her events while also being prone to different
overuse injuries (e.g., stress fractures).
Moreover, the amount of hypertrophy may be limited when considering
weight-categorized sports such as weightlifting, powerlifting, and combat sports.
Depending on the athlete’s body composition and body mass, there may only be
a limited potential for increases in lean body mass to ensure he or she does not
exceed the weight category.
Assessment of the Athlete
The second task is to profile the athlete’s needs and goals by evaluating
training (and injury) status, conducting a variety of tests (e.g., maximum
strength testing), evaluating the results, and determining the primary goal of
training. The more individualized the assessment process, the more specific the
resistance training program for each athlete can be.
Training Status
An athlete’s current condition or level of preparedness to begin a new or revised
program (training status) is an important consideration in the design of
training programs. This includes an evaluation by a sports medicine professional
of any current or previous injuries that may affect training. Also important is the
athlete’s training background or exercise history (training that occurred
before he or she began a new or revised program), because this information will
help the strength and conditioning professional better understand the athlete’s
training capabilities. Readers are referred to McKay and colleagues (108) for
classification of different levels of athlete performance. An assessment of the
athlete’s training background should examine the
type of training program (sprint, plyometric, resistance, and so on),
length of recent regular participation in previous training programs,
level of intensity involved in previous training programs, and
1196

degree of exercise technique experience (i.e., the knowledge and skill
to perform resistance training exercises properly).
Table 18.1 provides an example of how such information might be used to
classify athletes’ training status as beginner, intermediate, or advanced. The
strength and conditioning professional should realize that the three
classifications exist on a continuum and cannot be definitively demarcated. For
example, in terms of resistance training, many European soccer athletes will
have undertaken resistance training across their careers, but this is generally
emphasized during preseason training with a relatively low frequency and low
training stress, which is further reduced (or completely omitted) in-season,
resulting in few of these athletes ever being classified as advanced in terms of
resistance training status.
TABLE 18.1 Example of Classifying Resistance Training Status
Resistance training
status
Resistance training background
Current
program
Training
age
Frequency
(per week)
Training
stress*
Technique
experience and
skill
Beginner (untrained)
Not training or
just began
training
<2
months
≤1-2
None or
low
None or minimal
Intermediate
(moderately resistance
trained)
Currently
training
2-6
months
≤2-3
Medium
Basic
Advanced (well
resistance trained)
Currently
training
≥1 year
≥3-4
High
High
*In this example, “training stress” refers to the degree of physical demand or stimulus of the resistance
training program.
Physical Testing and Evaluation
Physical evaluation involves conducting assessments of the athlete’s strength,
flexibility, power, speed, muscular endurance, body composition, cardiovascular
endurance, and so on. In this chapter, the needs analysis focuses on assessing
maximal muscular strength, but a comprehensive assessment goes beyond that.
While 1RM testing provides valuable information about the maximal load an
athlete can lift during a specific exercise, which aids in programming specific
loads, it is important to evaluate other aspects of an athlete’s force production
ability. On its own, 1RM testing does not provide insight into an athlete’s
maximal or rapid force-generating capacity. As such, isometric strength
assessments, such as the isometric mid-thigh pull, can provide such insight,
1197

especially if combined with assessment of slow stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
function (e.g., countermovement jump) and fast SSC function (e.g., rebound
jump) using force plates. Readers are referred to chapters 13 and 14 for more
information on athlete testing.
In the soccer athlete example provided in figure 18.3, we see that the
athlete’s peak force and relative peak force during the isometric mid-thigh pull
are average for the performances across the league in which he or she
competes, highlighting a potential area for development. In contrast, the
athlete’s countermovement jump height (45 cm) is very good compared to the
rest of the league; however, their modified reactive strength index (0.46 [mRSI
= jump height / time to takeoff]) is only average, due to a prolonged time to
takeoff (1.0 s) (figure 18.4). This indicates that the athlete generated a sufficient
impulse (i.e., force × time) to achieve the 45-centimeter jump height, using a
greater time for acceleration and therefore a suboptimal force profile. As such,
the athlete needs to emphasize strength development; as Cormie and colleagues
(26, 28, 29) previously demonstrated, strength training and the associated
increase in maximal strength result in enhanced force production characteristics
during jumping, along with reductions in time to takeoff. Finally, the athlete’s
rebound jump performance highlights a good ground contact time (163 ms) but
a low rebound jump height (22 cm), resulting in an average reactive strength
index (1.40) compared to the performances across the league (figure 18.5). The
low jump height may be due to the inability to produce high enough forces
during the short ground contact time to provide a sufficient impulse for a higher
jump height. Overall, these characteristics highlight that the athlete needs to
enhance maximal and rapid force production. As such, initially emphasizing
maximal strength for a training block, followed by a subsequent block of training
emphasizing speed–strength, may be advantageous.
1198

FIGURE 18.3 Individual isometric mid-thigh pull metrics, presented as T-scores for the league in which
the athlete competes. Relative peak force (N/kg) is the athlete’s peak force (N) divided by body mass (kg).
FIGURE 18.4 Individual countermovement jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for the
league in which the athlete competes. mRSI = modified reactive strength index (mRSI = jump height /
TTT); TTT = time to takeoff (s).
1199

FIGURE 18.5 Individual countermovement rebound jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for
the league in which the athlete competes. RSI = reactive strength index (RSI = rebound jump height /
ground contact time).
To yield pertinent and reliable data that can be used effectively to develop a
resistance training program, the tests selected should be related to the athlete’s
sport, consistent with the athlete’s level of skill, and realistically based on the
equipment available. The result of the movement analysis discussed previously
provides direction in selecting tests. Typically, major upper body exercises (e.g.,
bench press and shoulder press) and exercises that mimic jumping movements
to varying degrees (e.g., power clean, squat, front squat) are used in testing
batteries. Such assessments should not replace the assessment of jump
performance but instead should be used to determine whether any substandard
jump performances are due to poor strength levels.
After testing is completed, the results should be compared with normative or
descriptive data (if published data exist or at least to squad data in team sports)
to determine the athlete’s strengths and weaknesses. Based on this evaluation
and the needs analysis of the sport, a training program can be developed to
improve deficiencies, maintain strengths, or further develop physiological
qualities that will enable the athlete to better meet the demands of the sport.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
The athlete’s testing results, the movement and physiological analysis of the
sport, and the priorities of the athlete’s sport season determine the primary goal
or outcome for the resistance training program. Typically, this goal is to improve
1200

strength, power, hypertrophy, or muscular endurance. Despite a potential desire
or need to make improvements in two different areas (e.g., strength and
muscular endurance), an effort should be made to concentrate on only one
training outcome per training block. This can be accomplished using an
emphasis/de-emphasis approach wherein specific fitness characteristics are
targeted during different training periods while others are de-emphasized (67).
An example of how the strength and conditioning professional may prioritize the
resistance training emphases during the four main sport seasons is shown in
table 18.2. However, while focusing on the development of a specific physical
characteristic, it is important to provide sufficient stimuli for the maintenance of
other physical characteristics, especially if they are to be emphasized in
subsequent blocks of training. A common strategy in many team sports is to
alternate between strength (i.e., strength–speed) and power (i.e., speed–
strength) development in-season, because the higher volumes associated with
strength endurance– and hypertrophy-focused training can induce excessive
fatigue and potentially result in an increased injury risk. However, while this may
be easier to accomplish with individual sports or events (e.g., track and field), a
team-based sport (e.g., basketball, soccer, hockey) that requires several fitness
characteristics for success may have to use a multitargeted approach within
training to develop those multiple characteristics simultaneously (177). Within
this approach, it has been suggested that compatible fitness characteristics (e.g.,
strength–power and speed) be trained simultaneously while avoiding
incompatible characteristics (e.g., speed and cardiovascular endurance). An
emphasis/de-emphasis approach can still be used in these situations (see
chapter 22 for more information).
TABLE 18.2 Example of General Training Priorities by Sport
Season
Sport season
Priority given to
Resistance training goal*
Sport
practice
Resistance
training
Off-season
Low
High
Hypertrophy and muscular endurance (initially); strength
and power (later)
Preseason
Medium
Medium
Sport and movement specific (i.e., strength, power, or
muscular endurance, depending on the sport)
In-season
High
Low
Maintenance of preseason training goal; if in-season is
long, these goals may alternate between different
characteristics (e.g., strength and power)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals listed here.
1201

Postseason
(active rest)
Variable
Variable
Not specific (may include activities other than sport skill or
resistance training)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals listed here.
1202

Step 2: Exercise Selection
Exercise selection involves choosing exercises for a resistance training
program. To make informed exercise selections, the strength and conditioning
professional must understand the nature of various types of resistance training
exercises, the movement and muscular requirements of the sport, the athlete’s
exercise technique experience, the equipment available, and the amount of
training time available. Figure 18.2 on page 528 displays exercise selection flow
charts for lower body strength and power exercises.
Exercise Type
Although there are hundreds of resistance training exercises to select from when
one is designing a program, most involve primary muscle groups or body areas
and fall into categories based on their relative importance to the athlete’s sport.
Core and Assistance Exercises
Exercises can be classified as either core or assistance based on the size of the
muscle areas involved and their level of contribution to a particular sport
movement. Core exercises recruit one or more large muscle areas (i.e., chest,
shoulder, back, hip, or thigh), involve two or more primary joints (multijoint
exercises; e.g., split squat, bench press, bent-over row), and receive priority
when one is selecting exercises because of their direct application to the sport
and enhanced dynamic correspondence (i.e., transference of gym-based training
to improved performance in athletic tasks). Assistance exercises usually
recruit smaller muscle areas (i.e., upper arm, abdominal muscles, calf, neck,
forearm, lower back, or anterior lower leg), involve only one primary joint
(single-joint exercises; e.g., knee extension and flexion, biceps curls), and
are considered less important for improving sport performance. Generally, all the
joints at the shoulder—the glenohumeral and shoulder girdle articulations—are
considered one primary joint when resistance training exercises are categorized
as core or assistance. The spine is similarly considered a single primary joint
(e.g., abdominal crunch and back extension exercises).
Application of the Needs Analysis
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1203

Female collegiate basketball
player
In-season
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Male high school cross country
runner
Preseason
SPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport: Running and jumping, ball
handling, shooting, blocking, and
rebounding
Muscular involvement: All major
muscle areas, especially the hips,
thighs, and shoulders
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Strength/power
SPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport: Grabbing, pushing,
repelling, and deflecting
opponents
Muscular involvement: All
major muscle areas, especially
the hips, thighs, chest, arms,
and low back
Physiological analysis
(primary requirement)
Hypertrophy
SPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport: Running, repetitive leg and
arm movements
Muscular involvement: All lower
body muscle areas, postural
muscles, shoulders, and arms
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Muscular endurance
ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance trained regularly
since high school
Possesses excellent skill in
performing free weight and
machine exercises
Just completed a 3×/week
resistance training program in
the preseason consisting of full-
body workouts that included
lower and upper body exercises
during each session (4 core, 3
sets of 3 reps using loads
ranging from 4RM-6RM)
ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance trained
regularly throughout high
school, college, and his
professional career
Possesses excellent skill in
performing free weight and
machine exercises
Just completed a 2×/week
resistance training program
in the postseasonb consisting
of 8 exercises (3 core, 5
assistance; 4 lower body, 4
upper body, 2-3 sets of
12RM-15RM loads)
ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Just began resistance training in
preseason
Has only limited skill in
performing free weight and
machine exercises
Just completed a 3×/week
resistance training program in
the off-seasonc consisting of full-
body workouts that included
lower and upper body exercises
during each session (2-3 sets of
6-8 reps using loads ranging
from 8RM-10RM)
CLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
Advanced
CLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
Advanced
CLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
Beginner
PRIMARY IN-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Strength/powera
PRIMARY OFF-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING
GOAL
Hypertrophy
PRIMARY PRESEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Muscular endurance
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1204

COMMENTS
aThe in-season will address both of
these goals through a combination
of appropriate exercise selection
and volume–load assignments.
COMMENTS
bDue to the extreme physical
demands of American football,
this athlete’s postseason
training volume was greater
than is often assigned for the
active rest phase of a typical
program.
COMMENTS
cBecause this athlete just began
his resistance training program, his
frequency was limited to 3×/week
in the off-season rather than the
4×/week that are typically
completed by better-trained
individuals.
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
A common application of assistance exercises is for injury prevention and
rehabilitation, because these exercises often isolate a specific muscle or muscle
group. The muscles that are predisposed to injury from the unique demands of a
sport skill (e.g., the shoulder external rotators for overhand pitching) or those
that require reconditioning after an injury (e.g., a quadriceps contusion) can be
specifically conditioned by an assistance exercise. However, it is important that
the chosen exercises improve a physical characteristic within the program
(flexibility, strength, etc.) and that the professional prescribes them appropriately
with specific volumes and intensities.
Structural and Power Exercises
A core exercise that emphasizes loading the spine directly (e.g., back squat) or
indirectly (e.g., power clean) can be further described as a structural
exercise. More specifically, a structural exercise involves muscular stabilization
of posture during performance of the lifting movement (e.g., maintaining a rigid
torso and a neutral spine during the back squat). Practitioners should be mindful
that during traditional structural exercises (e.g., squat and bench press), a
substantial portion of the range of motion results in deceleration (47, 93, 119).
As such, ballistic tasks that emphasize movement velocity (e.g., loaded jumps)
should be programmed to emphasize power development. A structural exercise
that is performed very quickly or explosively is considered a power exercise.
Typically, power exercises are assigned to athletes when they are appropriate for
the athlete’s sport-specific training priorities. It should be noted, however, that in
weak athletes, or those with a low training age, emphasizing strength
development has been shown to enhance power output to an equal or greater
extent than ballistic training (26, 28, 29). Semi-ballistic exercises, such as
weightlifting exercises and their derivatives, can also be used effectively for the
development of power because they provide the potential to emphasize a
velocity- or force-dominant stimulus (figure 18.6) (21, 170-173). Such a diverse
range of exercises also permits substantial variation and the opportunity to
1205

select exercises to accommodate technique, mobility, and injury-related
consideration.
FIGURE 18.6 Recommended loading ranges to emphasize speed–strength, strength–speed, or general
power development using weightlifting exercises and their derivatives. Red shading illustrates the primary
loading emphasis for the exercises, whereas blue shading illustrates loading, which is likely to be less
effective at enhancing the specific strength characteristic. Loads are based on the 1RM for the power clean,
power snatch, or the overhead derivative, as appropriate.
Adapted by permission from P. Comfort, G.G. Haff, T.J. Suchomel, et al., “National Strength and Conditioning Association Position
Statement on Weightlifting for Sports Performance,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 37, no. 6 (2023): 1168.
Movement Analysis of the Sport
In the needs analysis (step 1), the strength and conditioning professional has
identified the unique requirements and characteristics of the sport. The exercises
selected for a resistance training program that focus on conditioning for a
particular sport need to be relevant to the activities of that sport in their body
and limb movement patterns, joint ranges of motion, and muscles involved and
muscle actions. The exercises should also create muscular balance to reduce risk
of injury from disproportionate training. For example, the hamstrings serve as
knee flexors and hip extensors, while the quadriceps are knee extensors.
Researchers have shown that the muscle activation of the hamstrings and
1206

quadriceps may vary based on the exercises that are chosen (101, 153, 190).
Thus, it is up to the strength and conditioning professional to understand how
each exercise may affect muscular development and to prescribe exercises
accordingly based on the needs of his or her athletes.
Sport-Specific Exercises
The more similar the training activity is to the actual sport movement, the
greater the likelihood that there will be a positive transfer to that sport (i.e.,
dynamic correspondence) (160, 165). This is the specificity concept, sometimes
confused with the SAID principle. Arguably the SAID principle is more important
than movement specificity; strength and conditioning professionals need to be
mindful of the specific physiological adaptations that are targeted during each
phase of training. Table 18.3 provides examples of resistance training exercises
that relate in varying degrees to the movement patterns of various sports. The
strength and conditioning professional should find this table helpful when trying
to identify sport-specific exercises to ensure dynamic correspondence. For
example, the primary muscles involved in jumping for basketball are the hip and
knee extensors. An athlete can train these muscles by performing the leg press
or back squat, but which exercise is preferable? Certainly, both exercises
strengthen the hip and knee extensors, but because jumping is performed from
an erect body position with balance and weight-bearing forces as considerations,
the back squat is more relevant to jumping and is therefore preferred over the
leg press (12, 84). Additionally, full hip extension is achieved during a squat and
a jump, but this is not the case for all leg press machines. The weightlifting
movements and their derivatives are relevant to jumping because of their quick
movement characteristics, thereby applying a high rate of force development
and power output (16, 87).
TABLE 18.3 Examples of Movement-Related Resistance
Training Exercises
Movement pattern
Related exercises
Ball dribbling and passing
Closed-grip bench press, dumbbell bench press, triceps pushdown, reverse
curl, hammer curl
Ball kicking
Unilateral hip adduction and abduction, single-leg squat, forward step
lunge, leg (knee) extension, leg raise
Freestyle swimming
(including start and turns)
Pull-up, lateral shoulder raise, forward step lunge, upright row, barbell
pullover, single-leg squat
Vertical jumping (ballistic,
slow SSC)
Snatch, power clean, push jerk, back squat, front squat, loaded squat jump,
jump shrug, push press, push jerk
1207

Vertical jumping (plyometric,
fast SSC)
Drop jump, rebound jump, standing calf raise, seated calf raise
Racket stroke
Flat dumbbell fly, lunge, bent-over lateral raise, wrist curl, wrist extension
Rowing
Power clean, clean pull, snatch pull, hang high pull, bent-over row, seated
row, back squat, leg press, deadlift, stiff-leg deadlift, good morning
Running, sprinting
Snatch, clean, power clean, back squat, front squat, forward step lunge,
step-up, leg (knee) extension, leg (knee) curl, toe raise (dorsiflexion)
Throwing, pitching
Lunge, single-leg squat, barbell pullover, overhead triceps extension,
shoulder internal and external rotation
Muscle Balance
Exercises selected for the specific demands of the sport should maintain a
balance of muscular strength across joints and between opposing muscle groups
(e.g., biceps brachii and triceps brachii). Avoid designing a resistance training
program that increases the risk of injury due to a disparity between the strength
of the agonist, the muscle or muscle group actively causing the movement
(e.g., the quadriceps in the leg [knee] extension exercise), and the antagonist,
the sometimes passive (i.e., not concentrically involved) muscle or muscle group
located on the opposite side of the limb (e.g., the hamstrings in the leg [knee]
extension exercise). If an imbalance is created or discovered, exercises to
restore an appropriate strength balance need to be selected. For example, if
isokinetic testing reveals that the hamstrings are extremely weak compared with
the quadriceps, additional hamstring exercises could be included to compensate
for the imbalance (48). Isokinetic adaptations may be specific to the muscle
actions involved as well as the speeds used during the training protocols (31,
129) and do not transfer effectively to enhanced performance in athletic tasks
(94, 122). Note that muscle balance does not always mean equal strength,
just a proper ratio of strength, power, or muscular endurance of one muscle or
muscle group relative to another muscle or muscle group.
Exercise Technique Experience
An important part of the needs analysis described earlier is evaluating the
athlete’s training status and exercise technique. If there is any question whether
an athlete can perform an exercise with proper technique, the strength and
conditioning professional should ask the athlete to demonstrate the exercise. If
the athlete uses incorrect technique, the strength and conditioning professional
should provide complete instruction. Often, unskilled individuals are introduced
to machines and free weight assistance exercises because these are considered
easier to perform than free weight core exercises due to their lower balance and
coordination requirements (146, 147). Despite this, one should not assume that
1208

the athlete will perform exercises correctly, even those that are relatively easy to
perform. Thus, a strength and conditioning professional should provide
appropriate exercise progressions and regressions that are based on each
athlete’s technique and their ability to maintain their technique with heavier
loads. An example of squat progression and regression exercises is displayed in
figure 18.7.
FIGURE 18.7 Squat progression and regression exercise examples. Note: Individual exercises may also
be progressed or regressed using different loads. In addition, advanced athletes may progress the front
squat and back squat using variable resistance training with chains or bands as well as accentuated
eccentric loading.
Availability of Resistance Training Equipment
The availability of training equipment must be considered in the selection of
exercises. A lack of certain equipment may necessitate selecting exercises that
are not as sport specific. For example, the absence of Olympic-type barbells with
revolving sleeves would preclude exercises such as the power clean, and an
insufficient supply of barbell plates may result in substituting exercises that do
not require as much resistance; for example, the back squat could be replaced
by the front squat.
Available Training Time Per Session
The strength and conditioning professional should weigh the value of certain
exercises against the time it takes to perform them. Some exercises take longer
to complete than others. If time for a training session is limited, exercises that
are more time efficient may need to be given priority over others. For example,
the machine leg press could be selected instead of the free weight lunge to train
the hips and thighs of a 100-meter sprinter. The time required to move the
machine pin to the correct slot in a weight stack and perform 5 repetitions of a
machine leg press is much less than the time required for the lunge exercise, for
which the athlete must load both ends of a bar, attach the locks, back out of the
power rack, establish a stable starting position, perform 5 repetitions of each
leg, and rerack the bar. Although the machine leg press is less sport specific, the
1209

time saved may permit including other exercises or performing more sets. The
benefit of including the more specific lunge exercise, on the other hand, may be
worth the additional time needed, although this depends on the goals of the
training session and time available.
Application of the Exercise Selection Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes. Exercises are not
listed in order of execution.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
CORE
Push jerk (total body,
power)a
Hang power clean (total
body, power)a
Jump shrug (total body,
power)a
Front squat (hip and
thigh)
Romanian deadlift
(posterior hip and thigh)
Incline bench press
(chest)
Seated row (upper back)
Pull-up (back, shoulders,
arms)
COREb
Power clean (total body, power)
Tire flipping (total body, power)
Back squat (hip and thigh)
Deadlift (hip and thigh)
Bench press (chest)
Shoulder press (shoulders)
CORE
Hexagonal barbell deadlift (hip and thigh)
Lunge (hip and thigh)c
Rear leg–elevated split-squat (hip and
thigh)
Single-leg stiff-legged deadlift (posterior
hip and thigh)
Vertical chest press (chest)d
ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch
(abdomen)
Single-leg stiff-legged
deadlift (posterior hip and
thigh)
Standing calf raise
(posterior lower leg)
ASSISTANCE
Towel-grip pull-up (forearm grip)
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Step-up (hip and thigh)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Bent-over row (upper back)
Shoulder shrug (upper back and
neck)
Barbell biceps curl (anterior
upper arm)
Lying triceps extension (posterior
upper arm)
Seated calf (heel) raise (posterior
lower leg)
ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Lateral shoulder raise (shoulders)
One-arm dumbbell row (upper back)e
Toe raise (dorsiflexion) (anterior lower
leg)
Machine back extension (lower back)
Cable hip flexion (hip flexors)
COMMENTS
COMMENTS
COMMENTS
1210

aThese exercises are
included to maximize
power and match the
jumping movements of
basketball.
This athlete has extra time
available to perform more
resistance training exercises
because sport skill practice is not
the first priority in the off-season.
bGreater training frequency
allows more core exercises to be
included (see step 3).
cAlthough not always considered a core
exercise, the lunge recruits muscles and
joints that have direct application to
running.
dThis exercise also involves the triceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance exercise
to isolate the triceps is not needed. This
reduces the time devoted to the
resistance training portion of the
preseason program.
eThis exercise also involves the biceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance exercise
to isolate the biceps is not needed. This
reduces the time devoted to the
resistance training portion of the
preseason program.
1211

Step 3: Training Frequency
Training frequency refers to the number of training sessions completed in a
given time period. For a resistance training program, a common time period is
one week. When determining training frequency, the strength and conditioning
professional should consider the athlete’s training status, sport season, projected
exercise loads, types of exercises, and other concurrent training or activities.
When the weekly resistance training volume–load is equated, hypertrophic
adaptations (142) and strength adaptations (34) are comparable irrespective of
training frequency.
Training Status
The athlete’s level of preparedness for training, which was determined during
the needs analysis (step 1), is an influential factor in determining training
frequency because it affects the number of rest days needed between training
sessions. Traditionally, three workouts per week are recommended for many
athletes, because the intervening days allow sufficient recovery between
sessions. As an athlete adapts to training and becomes better conditioned, it is
appropriate to consider increasing the number of training days to four and, with
additional training, maybe five, six, or seven (table 18.4), although this depends
on the phase of the competitive cycle. The general guideline is to schedule
training sessions to include at least one rest or recovery day—but not more than
three—between sessions that stress the same muscle groups (77); however, this
may also depend on the intensity of the prescribed exercises. For example, if a
strength and conditioning professional wants a novice athlete to perform a total
body resistance training program two times per week, the sessions should be
spaced out evenly (e.g., Monday and Thursday or Tuesday and Friday). If the
athlete trains only on Monday and Wednesday, the absence of a training
stimulus between Wednesday and the following Monday may result in a
decrease in the athlete’s training status (41, 61, 77), although, for a short time
in well-trained athletes, one session per week can maintain strength if
appropriate loading strategies are implemented (41, 61). Examples of training
frequencies of 3 and 4 times per week using a total body push–pull format are
presented in table 18.5.
TABLE 18.4 Resistance Training Frequency Based on Training
Status
1212

Training status
Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Beginner
2-3
Intermediate
3-4
Advanced*
4-7
*May include multiple sessions per day.
Data from Graves et al. (1988); Häkkinen et al. (1988); Hoffman et al. (1990).
TABLE 18.5 Examples of Common Total-Body Routines Using
a Push–Pull Emphasis
Training
organization
Body parts or
muscle groups
trained
Sample training week
Resulting
training
frequency
Sun
Mon
Tues
Wed
Thurs
Fri
Sat
Push–pull
Total body
Rest Heavy
push
Rest
Heavy
pull
Rest
Light
mix
Rest
3 times per
week
Push–pull
Total body
Rest Heavy
push
Rest
Heavy
pull
Light
push
Rest
Light
pull
4 times per
week
More highly resistance-trained (intermediate or advanced) athletes can
augment their training by using a split routine in which different muscle
groups are trained on different days. Training nearly every day may seem to
violate the recommended guidelines for recovery, but grouping exercises that
train a portion of the body (e.g., lower body or upper body) or certain muscle
areas (e.g., chest, shoulder, and triceps) gives the trained athlete an opportunity
to adequately recover between similar training sessions (table 18.6). For
instance, a common lower body–upper body regimen includes four training
sessions per week: lower body on Monday and Thursday and upper body on
Tuesday and Friday (or vice versa). This way, there are two or three days of rest
between each lower or upper body training session, even though the athlete
trains on two consecutive days twice a week (80). For split routines with three
distinct training days, the rest days are not on the same day each week. It
should be noted that there are no differences in muscle hypertrophy or strength
adaptations between split and total body routines when training volume is
equated (131). However, since volumes may not always be matched in training,
it is possible that a split routine may allow athletes to accumulate a greater
volume–load per muscle group, potentially benefiting hypertrophy and general
strength characteristics. Given that athletes may have limited time to train, and
the fact that sports do not isolate specific muscle groups, strength and
conditioning professionals must determine whether a split routine is appropriate
for their athletes and when and how it could be implemented. For example, an
1213

off-season training program may be an appropriate time to implement a split
routine because this is typically the time when athletes may focus on developing
muscle hypertrophy, which has been associated with higher training volumes
(143). In contrast, preseason and in-season phases of training may not be
appropriate for split routines given the emphasis on developing maximal and
rapid force production characteristics, reducing training volume and fatigue, and
improving sport-specific technical skills.
TABLE 18.6 Examples of Common Split Routines
Training
day
Body
parts or
muscle
groups
trained
Sample training week
Resulting
training
frequency
Sun
Mon
Tues
Wed
Thurs
Fri
Sat
1
Lower
body
Rest
Lower
body
Upper
body
Rest
Lower
body
Upper
body
Rest
4 times
per week
2
Upper
body
1
Chest,
shoulders,
triceps
Rest
Chest,
shoulders,
triceps
Lower
body
Back,
trapezius,
biceps
Rest
Chest,
shoulders,
triceps
Lower
body
5 times
per week*
2
Lower
body
3
Back,
trapezius,
biceps
1
Chest and
back
Chest
and
back
Lower
body
Shoulders
and arms
Rest
Chest
and
back
Lower
body
Shoulders
and arms
6 times
per week*
2
Lower
body
3
Shoulders
and arms
*Frequency varies between five times per week and six times per week, depending on the day of the week
that is the first training day.
Sport Season
Another factor that influences resistance training frequency is the sport season.
For example, the increased emphasis on practicing the sport skill during the in-
season necessitates a decrease in the time spent in the weight room and,
consequently, reduces the frequency of resistance training (tables 18.4 and
18.7). The problem is that there simply is not enough time to fit all the desired
1214

modes of training into each day. So even though a well-trained athlete may be
capable of completing four or more resistance training sessions per week, the
other time demands of the sport (i.e., competition schedule, technical and
tactical training) may not permit this. When time is constrained, the subdivision
of weekly training volume across multiple short-duration bouts, termed
microdosing, has been suggested as a potentially useful strategy, which may
mitigate the fatigue associated with longer duration, higher volume training
sessions (34, 35).
TABLE 18.7 Resistance Training Frequency Based on the
Sport Season (for a Trained Athlete)
Sport season
Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Off-season
4-6
Preseason
3-4
In-season
1-3
Postseason (active rest)
0-3
Data from Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Tesch (1992).
Training Load and Exercise Type
The ability to train more frequently may be enhanced by alternating heavier and
lighter training days (42, 166, 177). As shown in table 18.5, heavy and light
training days may be organized based on the type of exercises that are being
performed regardless of whether the same muscle groups are being used. While
training to failure may lengthen the necessary recovery time between sessions
(59, 117), athletes may not require longer recovery times despite training with
heavier loads if the volume remains low for the selected exercises (5). However,
strength and conditioning professionals should be aware that higher volume
loads can lengthen the necessary recovery time between training sessions (124).
There is also evidence that upper body muscles can recover more quickly from
heavy loading sessions compared to lower body muscles (76). The same is true
regarding an athlete’s ability to recover faster from single-joint exercises
compared to multijoint exercises (158). These research findings may explain
why, for example, powerlifters may schedule only one very heavy deadlift or
squat training session per week.
More importantly, in a recent meta-analysis, Swinton and colleagues (182)
concluded that the most important factor for appropriate adaptations is the
intensity used, with heavy loads (≥80% 1RM) resulting in the greatest increases
in strength and with low to moderate loads (≤30% 1RM) during ballistic tasks
1215

stimulating the greatest increases in vertical jump performance and moderate
loads (40%-70% 1RM) being the most appropriate for power development.
However, as mentioned previously, an emphasis on strength development in
weaker individuals may result in the greatest improvements in performance (8,
26, 29, 30, 178). This is likely due to the fact that relative force production
determines acceleration, with the duration over which the force is applied
determining acceleration, based on the impulse–momentum theorem.
Other Training
Exercise frequency is also influenced by the overall amount of physical stress, so
the strength and conditioning professional must consider the effects of all forms
of exercise. If the athlete’s program already includes aerobic endurance (e.g.,
long, slow distance) or speed, agility, and power (e.g., sprinting, agility, speed–
endurance, plyometric) training, sport skill practice, or any combination of these
components, the frequency of resistance training may need to be reduced (32).
Additionally, the effects of a physically demanding occupation may be relevant.
Athletes who work in manual labor jobs, instruct or assist others in physical
activities, or are on their feet all day may not be able to withstand the same
training frequency as athletes who are less active outside of their sport-related
pursuits.
1216

Step 4: Exercise Order
Exercise order refers to a sequence of resistance exercises performed during
one training session. Although there are many ways to arrange exercises,
decisions are invariably based on how one exercise affects the quality of effort or
the technique of another exercise. Usually, exercises are arranged so that an
athlete’s maximal force capabilities are available (from a sufficient rest or
recovery period) to complete a set with proper exercise technique. Four of the
most common methods of ordering resistance exercises are described in the
following paragraphs.
Application of the Training Frequency Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball
player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
ADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/week
ADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/week
BEGINNER TRAINING
STATUS ALLOWS
2-3×/week
FREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT SEASON
1-3×/week
FREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
4-6×/week
FREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
3-4×/week
ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
3×/weeka
Total body workouts performed on
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
while incorporating a push, pull,
and mix emphasis
ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
4×/week (split routineb)
Monday and Thursday (lower body
exercises)
Tuesday and Friday (upper body
exercises)
ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
2×/weekc
Total body workouts performed
on Wednesday and Saturday
while incorporating a heavy and
light emphasis
COMMENTS
aTraining frequency is maintained
from the previous season
(preseason) to allow for the
maintenance and improvement of
strength–power characteristics
during the in-season phase of
training.
COMMENTS
bA split routine allows for more
overall exercises to be performed
without an excessive increase in
training time (per session)
because the exercises are divided
over more training days.
COMMENTS
cDespite the sport season, the
assigned training frequency is
based on the athlete’s training
status and the additional need
to develop cardiovascular
endurance.
1217

Power, Other Core, Then Assistance Exercises
Power exercises such as weightlifting movements and their derivatives (e.g.,
snatch, hang power clean, jump shrug) and other ballistic exercises (e.g., jump
squat or hexagonal barbell jump) should be performed first in a training session,
followed by other non-power core exercises, and then assistance exercises. This
is due to the large neuromuscular demand placed on the body by power
exercises because they require greater levels of skill and are prone to fatigue
(71). The literature also refers to this arrangement as multijoint exercises and
then single-joint exercises or large muscle areas and then small muscle areas
(151, 183). Athletes who become fatigued are prone to using poor technique
and consequently are at higher risk of injury. The explosive movements and
extensive muscular involvement of power exercises also result in substantial
energy expenditure (138). This is another reason to have athletes perform such
exercises first, while they are still metabolically fresh. If power exercises are not
selected in step 2 (exercise selection), the recommended order of exercises is
core exercises (ideally with the most demanding exercises first) and then
assistance exercises. This is an important consideration because researchers
have shown that greater maximal strength adaptations may be produced with
the exercises programmed earlier in a training session (44, 152) while the latter
exercises may be negatively affected due to the accumulated fatigue (116, 150,
152).
Lower and Upper Body Exercises (Alternated)
One method of providing the opportunity for athletes to recover more fully
between exercises is to alternate lower body exercises with upper body
exercises. This arrangement is especially helpful for untrained individuals who
find that completing several lower or upper body exercises in succession is too
strenuous (50). Also, if training time is limited, this method of arranging
exercises minimizes the length of the rest periods required between exercises
and maximizes the rest between body areas. The result is a decrease in overall
training time because the athlete can perform a lower body exercise and then
immediately go to an upper body exercise without having to wait for the lower
body to rest. However, when choosing an order between lower and upper body
exercises, strength and conditioning professionals should consider prescribing
lower body exercises first since these movements typically involve more muscle
mass and may place a greater overall stress on the body due to the absolute
loads that will be used. If the exercises are performed with minimal rest periods
(20-30 s), this method is also referred to as circuit training (generally not
optimal for the development of maximal strength)—a method sometimes also
1218

used to improve cardiovascular endurance (58, 130), although to a lesser extent
than conventional aerobic exercise training.
“Push” and “Pull” Exercises (Alternated)
Another method of improving efficiency of training when time is limited is to
alternate pushing exercises (e.g., bench press, shoulder press, triceps extension)
with pulling exercises (e.g., lat pulldown, bent-over row, biceps curl) (2). This
push–pull arrangement ensures that the same muscle group will not be used in
two exercises (or sets, in some cases) in succession, thus reducing fatigue in the
involved muscles. This approach is similar to the programming of antagonistic
supersets, described later. In contrast, arranging several pulling exercises (e.g.,
pull-up, seated row, hammer curl) one after the other, even with a rest period
between each, will compromise the number of repetitions performed because
the biceps brachii muscle (involved in all three exercises) will become less
responsive due to fatigue. The same result would occur if several pushing
exercises (e.g., incline bench press, shoulder press, triceps pushdown) were
sequentially arranged (all three engage the triceps brachii) (150). There are also
push–pull arrangements for the lower body—for example, back squat and front
squat as “push” and stiff-legged deadlift and leg (knee) curl as “pull”—but the
classification of some exercises as “push” or “pull” is not as clear (e.g., leg
[knee] extension). However, in such examples strength and conditioning
professionals need to be mindful when selecting such exercises to ensure that
key stabilizing muscles (e.g., erector spinae) are not excessively fatigued in both
exercises. Alternating push and pull exercises is also used in circuit training
programs and is an ideal arrangement for novice athletes or those returning to a
resistance training program (3).
Supersets and Compound Sets
Other methods of arranging exercises involve having athletes perform one set of
a pair of exercises with little to no rest between them. Two common examples
are supersets and compound sets. A superset involves two sequentially
performed exercises that stress two opposing muscles or muscle areas (i.e., an
agonist and its antagonist) (2), similar to the push–pull approach. For example,
an athlete performs 10 repetitions of the barbell biceps curl exercise, sets the
barbell down, then goes over to the triceps pushdown station and performs 10
repetitions. A compound set involves sequentially performing two different
exercises for the same muscle group (2). For instance, an athlete completes a
set of the barbell biceps curl exercise, then switches to dumbbells and
immediately performs a set of the hammer curl exercise. In this case, the stress
on the same muscle is compounded because both exercises recruit the same
1219

muscle area. Both methods of arranging and performing pairs of exercises are
time efficient and purposely more demanding—and consequently may not be
appropriate for unconditioned athletes. Note, however, that sometimes the
meanings of superset and compound set are interchanged.
Application of the Exercise Order Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Power, other core, then
assistance exercises
“Push” and “pull” exercises
(alternated)
ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance
exercises
“Push” and “pull” exercises
(alternated)
ASSIGNED EXERCISE ORDER
STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance exercises
Lower and upper body exercises
(alternated)
MONDAY
Push jerk
Front squata
Incline bench pressb
Triceps pushdown
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean
Romanian deadlifta
Seated rowb
Dumbbell alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug
Rear leg–elevated split-
squata
Pull-upb
Single-leg stiff-legged
deadlift
LOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadliftc
Back squatc
Step-upc
Leg (knee) curl
Seated calf (heel) raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench press
Bent-over row
Shoulder press
Barbell biceps curld
Shoulder shrug
Lying triceps extension
Abdominal crunch
WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbell deadlift
Vertical chest press
One-arm dumbbell row
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
SATURDAY
Lunge
Lateral shoulder raise
Single-leg stiff-legged deadlift
Toe raise (dorsiflexion)
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
COMMENTS
a,bThese exercises are
alternated to provide relative
rest between their similar
movement patterns while still
following the “power, other
core, then assistance”
exercise order strategy.
COMMENTS
cThese exercises do not follow
the “push” and “pull”
(alternated) exercise
arrangement and could be
performed in a variety of
sequences (e.g., back squat,
deadlift, step-up).
COMMENTS
eExercises that concentrically train the
lower back muscles should be performed
after exercises that require an erect torso
or a neutral spine position (e.g., lunge
and lateral shoulder raise). Fatigue of the
lower back muscles can result in incorrect
and potentially injurious exercise
1220

dAlthough the barbell biceps
curl exercise is a “pulling”
movement and occurs before
another “pull” exercise
(shoulder shrug), it does not
affect the athlete’s ability to
perform the shoulder shrug
exercise.
technique in structural or standing
exercises.
1221

Step 5: Training Load and Repetitions
Load most simply refers to the amount of weight assigned to an exercise set
and is often characterized as the most critical aspect of a resistance training
program (50, 106, 162, 163).
Terminology Used to Quantify and Qualify
Mechanical Work
Mechanical work can be defined as the product of force and displacement
(sometimes referred to as distance). An athlete can perform (external)
mechanical work via demands made on the body to generate (internal)
metabolic energy. Thus, it is important to quantify the amount of mechanical
work or degree of metabolic demand to plan variation in the training program
and to avoid the exhaustion phase of Selye’s General Adaptation Syndrome
associated with overtraining (33, 148).
A quantity measure for resistance training work is needed. Traditionally, at
least in the sport of weightlifting, this work is called the load, and one can
calculate it by multiplying each weight lifted by the number of times it is lifted
and summing all such values over a training session. Volume–load is a proxy
for work, because displacement and force production are not measured in
applied settings. However, volume–load (90) is a better term than just load. This
quantity is related to mechanical work and the associated metabolic energy
demands and physiological stress and is distinguished from repetition-volume
(i.e., the total number of repetitions; see Step 6: Volume for more explanation).
Volume–load should be considered as system mass volume–load in the
calculation of resistance training in which the athlete or a mass is moved (e.g.,
loaded jump squats). For example, an 80-kilogram athlete with a 40-kilogram
jump squat load for 4 sets of 3 is doing 120 kilograms × 12, or 1,440 kilograms.
In contrast, when the athlete’s mass is not being lifted (e.g., bench press or
shoulder press), only the external load should be included in the volume–load
calculation. Volume–load approaches are also useful in quantifying the nature of
the total resistance training load, by separating the volume–load from core and
assistance exercises or delineating between hypertrophy, maximal strength, and
power training. In this way, the strength and conditioning professional can plan
or determine not just the total volume–load for the session but also what
stimulus is achieved primarily from the session.
The typical calculation of volume–load (i.e., sets × repetitions × load) does
not account for the distance that external load is traveling. Given that athletes
possess unique anthropometric characteristics (e.g., height and arm length), the
1222

amount of work being performed by athletes within a training session may vary.
For example, athletes who are 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) and 6 feet (1.83 m) in
stature who perform the back squat exercise with the same load and to the
same squat depth are performing different magnitudes of work based on the
displacement of the barbell. Within this scenario, the taller athlete must move
(displace) the external load a greater distance, which results in performing more
work than the shorter athlete. When monitoring training load, load displacement
can be accounted for by calculating volume–load displacement, which
multiplies volume–load by the displacement of the exercise. Although strongly
correlated to volume–load, researchers have indicated that volume–load
displacement may provide a better indicator of an athlete’s overall workload
totals (78). Thus, if strength and conditioning professionals have the time to
measure the displacements of exercises for their athletes (using appropriate
technology), greater insight into how athletes respond to various training phases
may be provided.
Note that the volume–load is not affected by the set and repetition scheme
(e.g., 15 sets of 1 repetition, 5 sets of 3 repetitions, 3 sets of 5 repetitions, or 1
set of 15 repetitions). Various set and repetition schemes affect the true
intensity value for resistance exercise and indicate the quality of work
performed. Instead of using time to calculate mechanical or metabolic power or
intensity, it is more practical to use a value that is proportional to time—namely,
rep-volume. The more repetitions performed, the longer the training session;
rest period lengths are an additional consideration and are not directly
accounted for. Dividing volume–load by rep-volume results in the average weight
lifted per repetition per workout session (162).
Relationship Between Load and Repetitions
The number of times an exercise can be performed (repetitions) is inversely
related to the load lifted; the heavier the load, the lower the number of
repetitions that can be performed. Therefore, focusing on one training goal
automatically implies the use of a certain load and repetition regimen (e.g.,
training for maximal muscular strength involves lifting very heavy loads [i.e.,
≥80% 1RM] for few repetitions [i.e., ≤6 repetitions]).
Before assigning training loads, the strength and conditioning professional
should understand this relationship between loads and repetitions. Load is
commonly described as either a certain percentage of a 1-repetition
maximum (1RM)—the greatest amount of weight that can be lifted with
proper technique for only 1 repetition—or the most weight lifted for a specified
number of repetitions, an xRM. For instance, if athletes can perform 10
repetitions with 60 kilograms in the back squat exercise, the 10RM is 60
1223

kilograms. It is assumed that the athlete provided a maximal effort; if he or she
had stopped at 9 repetitions but could have performed 1 more, a 10RM would
not have been achieved. Likewise, if he or she lifted 55 kilograms for 10
repetitions but could have performed more, the true 10RM was not accurately
assessed because the athlete possibly could have lifted 60 kilograms for 10
repetitions.
Table 18.8 shows the relationship between a submaximal load—calculated as
a percentage of the 1RM—and the number of repetitions that can be performed
at that load. By definition, 100% of the 1RM allows the athlete to perform 1
repetition. As the percentage of the 1RM (i.e., the load lifted) decreases, the
athlete will be able to successfully complete more repetitions. However, strength
and conditioning professionals should be cautious because the number of
repetitions that can be performed at a given load may be specific to the exercise
as well as the individual (120, 134).
TABLE 18.8 Percent of the 1RM and Repetitions Allowed
(%1RM–Repetition Relationship)
%1RM
Number of reps allowed
100
1
95
2
93
3
90
4
87
5
85
6
83
7
80
8
77
9
75
10
70
11
67
12
65
15
Note: The number of reps performed at each percentage may be based on individual characteristics as
well as the exercise being performed (120, 134).
Data from Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Mayhew et al. (1992).
1224

Although %1RM–repetition tables provide helpful guidelines for assigning an
athlete’s training loads, research to date does not support the widespread use of
such tables for establishing training loads for every exercise assigned to athletes,
for the following reasons:
Table 18.8 assumes there is a linear association between the loads lifted
and the repetitions performed; however, several studies have reported a
curvilinear relationship (95, 99, 103).
Resistance-trained athletes may be able to exceed the number of
repetitions listed in the table at any given percentage of their 1RM,
especially in lower body core exercises (74, 75, 120, 134).
The number of repetitions that can be performed at a certain percentage
of the 1RM is based on a single set. When an athlete performs multiple
sets, the loads may need to be reduced so that the desired number of
repetitions can be completed in all the sets. Despite the prevalence of 1RM
research, athletes may not always perform the predicted number of
repetitions at a specified percentage of a 1RM. For instance, researchers
have shown that subjects were able to perform two or three times more
repetitions than are listed in table 18.8 (74, 75, 134).
A certain percentage of the 1RM assigned to a machine exercise can result
in more repetitions at the same percentage of the 1RM than with a similar
free weight exercise (74, 75).
Exercises involving smaller muscle areas may not produce as many
repetitions as seen in table 18.8, and exercises recruiting large muscle
areas are likely to result in more repetitions performed (183).
Empirical evidence further suggests that as the percentage of the 1RM
decreases, the variability in the number of repetitions that can be
completed increases. For example, the most accurate relationship between
percentages of the 1RM and the maximum repetitions possible is for loads
greater than 75% of the 1RM and fewer than 10 repetitions (133) with
greater accuracy coming with even lower repetitions (45).
Therefore, loads calculated from the %1RM in table 18.8 should be used only
as a guideline for estimating a particular RM load for a resistance training
exercise. Even with the inherent weaknesses just explained, it appears that it is
still more accurate to assign loads based on a percentage of a test-established
1RM than it is to estimate a 1RM from a submaximal load (74, 75).
1RM and xRM Testing Options
To gather information needed to assign a training load, the strength and
conditioning professional has the option of determining the athlete’s
1225

actual 1RM (directly tested),
estimated 1RM from an xRM test (e.g., a 10RM), or
xRM based on the number of repetitions planned for that exercise (the
“goal” repetitions; e.g., 5 repetitions per set).
Once the actual 1RM is measured or estimated, the athlete’s training load is
calculated as a percentage of the 1RM. Alternatively, a xRM test may be
performed based on goal repetitions, thereby eliminating computations or
estimations. In many cases, the strength and conditioning professional will use a
variety of testing options depending on the exercises selected and the athlete’s
training background. A common strategy for testing sufficiently conditioned
athletes is to conduct a 1RM test in several core exercises and use xRM testing
for assistance exercises.
Testing the 1RM
To assign training loads based on a percentage of the 1RM, the strength and
conditioning professional must first determine the athlete’s 1RM. This method of
assessment is typically reserved for resistance-trained athletes who are classified
as intermediate or advanced and have exercise technique experience in the
exercises being tested; however, 1RM testing can be safely performed with
youth (19), adolescents (49), inexperienced adults (24), and older adults (127).
Individuals who are untrained, inexperienced, injured, or medically supervised
may not be appropriate participants for 1RM testing. One-repetition maximum
testing requires an adequate training status and lifting experience, because the
assessment of maximal strength places significant stress on the involved
muscles, connective tissues, and joints, although this has been shown to be
appropriate and reliable in youth and collegiate athletes with approximately 6
months’ experience in the power clean and back squat (24, 49). However, it may
be more appropriate to complete a 3RM test instead of a maximal 1RM test
because ignoring an athlete’s training status and exercise technique experience
diminishes the safety and accuracy of 1RM test results.
When selecting exercises for 1RM testing, the strength and conditioning
professional should choose core exercises, because the large muscle groups and
multiple joints are better able to handle the heavy loads. Despite this guideline,
an exercise should not be selected for 1RM testing if it cannot provide valid and
reliable data (i.e., does not accurately and consistently assess maximal muscular
strength). For instance, the large upper back musculature and multiple joints
involved in the bent-over row exercise can probably tolerate the loads for a 1RM
test, but maintaining a correct body position throughout testing would be
extremely difficult. The weaker stabilizing muscles of the lower back might
1226

become very fatigued after several testing sets, resulting in a loss of proper
exercise technique and an invalid test.
A variety of procedures can be used to accurately determine a 1RM; one
method is described in figure 18.8. Despite an orderly testing sequence,
variations in training status and exercise type will affect the absolute load
increases in sequential testing sets. For example, the gradual load increase for
1RM attempts for an athlete who can back squat 495 pounds (225 kg) may be
20 to 30 pounds (9-14 kg) per testing set. For a weaker athlete with a back
squat 1RM of 100 pounds (45 kg), a 20- or 30-pound testing load increment is
too aggressive and is not precise enough to yield an accurate 1RM value. To
improve the appropriateness and accuracy of the sequential testing sets, figure
18.8 also includes relative percentages that can be used instead of the absolute
load adjustments.
Estimating a 1RM
When maximal strength testing is not warranted, testing with a 3RM or 5RM
load (and then estimating or predicting the 1RM) can be a suitable secondary
option. This approach is appropriate for nearly all athletes, provided they can
demonstrate the proper technique in the exercise tested. Core and assistance
exercises can be selected for RM testing, but excessive warm-up and testing sets
may fatigue the athlete and compromise the accuracy of the test. It should be
noted, however, that the level of accuracy of predicting a 1RM from other xRM
tests becomes less accurate (i.e., commonly resulting in overestimations of the
1RM) as the number of repetitions completed increases and may also be
affected by the type of training with which the athlete is familiar (134).
Additionally, power exercises do not lend themselves well to xRM testing above 5
repetitions for repeated testing sets because technique can deteriorate rapidly
(71). Lower (and more accurate) xRM determinations using heavier loads can be
made once the athlete has sufficient training and technique experience.
The protocol for multiple RM testing is similar to that for 1RM testing, but
each set requires multiple repetitions, not one. After the completion of warm-up
sets, the athlete’s sequential load changes for the 10RM test are smaller than
those listed in figure 18.8 (approximately one-half). Continue the process of
testing until a load allowing the selected number of repetitions is determined. An
experienced strength and conditioning professional will be able to adjust the
loads so that the multiple RM can be measured within 3 to 5 testing sets.
Using a 1RM Table To estimate the athlete’s 1RM, consult table 18.9. In the
“Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 10 (%1RM = 75) row, first find the tested 10RM
load; then read across the row to the “Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 1 (%1RM
= 100) row to discover the athlete’s projected 1RM. For example, if an athlete’s
1227

10RM is 300 pounds, the estimated 1RM is 400 pounds. As noted in connection
with table 18.8 (page 544), the %1RM–repetition associations vary in the
literature. This table is intended for use as a guide until the athlete has
developed the neuromuscular attributes that will make testing with heavier loads
(e.g., 1RM-5RM) safe and effective. As noted earlier, one should be mindful that
the accuracy of the prediction reduces the repetitions’ increase (134).
Figure 18.8 A 1RM testing protocol.
1. Instruct the athlete to warm up with a light resistance that easily allows 5 to 10 repetitions.
2. Provide a 1-minute rest period.
3. Estimate a warm-up load that will allow the athlete to complete three to five repetitions by
adding
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% for upper body exercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% for lower body exercise.
4. Provide a 2-minute rest period.
5. Estimate a conservative, near-maximal load that will allow the athlete to complete two or
three repetitions by adding
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% for upper body exercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% for lower body exercise.
6. Provide a 2- to 4-minute rest period.
7. Make a load increase:
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% for upper body exercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% for lower body exercise
8. Instruct the athlete to attempt a 1RM.
9. If the athlete was successful, provide a 2- to 4-minute rest period and go back to step 7. If
the athlete failed, provide a 2- to 4-minute rest period; then decrease the load by
subtracting
5 to 10 pounds (2-4 kg) or 2.5% to 5% for upper body exercise or
15 to 20 pounds (7-9 kg) or 5% to 10% for lower body exercise.
AND then go back to step 8.
Continue increasing or decreasing the load until the athlete can complete one repetition with
proper exercise technique. Ideally, the athlete’s 1RM will be measured within three to five testing
sets.
Reprinted by permission from R.W. Earle, “Weight Training Exercise Prescription,” in Essentials of
Personal Training Symposium Workbook (NSCA Certification Commission, 2006), 3-39.
Using Prediction Equations Equations are also available to predict the 1RM
from xRM loads (103, 104). Researchers who have reviewed such equations
report that as the loads used in xRM testing become heavier (i.e., bringing the
loads closer to the actual 1RM), the accuracy of the 1RM estimation increases
(45). Furthermore, the results obtained from lower xRM testing (and subsequent
predictions of the 1RM) are generally more accurate when an athlete has been
1228

consistently training with low xRM resistances (i.e., heavy loads) for a few
months before testing (14).
xRM Testing Based on Goal Repetitions
A third option for determining training loads requires the strength and
conditioning professional to first decide on the number of repetitions (i.e., the
goal repetitions) the athlete will perform in the actual program for the
exercise being tested. For example, if the strength and conditioning professional
decides that the athlete should perform 6 repetitions for the bench press
exercise in the training program, the xRM testing protocol should have the
athlete perform the exercise with a load that will result in 6 repetitions (6RM).
Core and assistance exercises can be selected for xRM testing, but as previously
mentioned, high-repetition testing sets can create significant fatigue and may
compromise the accuracy of the tested xRM. This effect seems to be more
problematic for exercises that involve multiple joints and large muscle areas due
to their high metabolic demand (138, 185). Further, xRM testing (and
subsequent load assignments) for assistance exercises should be at or above an
8RM to minimize the isolative stress on the involved joint and connective tissue
(2, 46). In other words, even if an athlete is following a muscular strength
training program that involves 2RM loads for the core exercises, the heaviest
load the assistance exercises should be assigned is an 8RM.
TABLE 18.9 Estimating 1RM and Training Loads
Maximum repetitions (RM)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
15
%1RM
100
95
93
90
87
85
83
80
77
75
67
65
Load (pounds or kilograms)
10
10
9
9
9
9
8
8
8
8
7
7
20
19
19
18
17
17
17
16
15
15
13
13
30
29
28
27
26
26
25
24
23
23
20
20
40
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
27
26
50
48
47
45
44
43
42
40
39
38
34
33
60
57
56
54
52
51
50
48
46
45
40
39
70
67
65
63
61
60
58
56
54
53
47
46
80
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
54
52
90
86
84
81
78
77
75
72
69
68
60
59
100
95
93
90
87
85
83
80
77
75
67
65
110
105
102
99
96
94
91
88
85
83
74
72
1229

120
114
112
108
104
102
100
96
92
90
80
78
130
124
121
117
113
111
108
104
100
98
87
85
140
133
130
126
122
119
116
112
108
105
94
91
150
143
140
135
131
128
125
120
116
113
101
98
160
152
149
144
139
136
133
128
123
120
107
104
170
162
158
153
148
145
141
136
131
128
114
111
180
171
167
162
157
153
149
144
139
135
121
117
190
181
177
171
165
162
158
152
146
143
127
124
200
190
186
180
174
170
166
160
154
150
134
130
210
200
195
189
183
179
174
168
162
158
141
137
220
209
205
198
191
187
183
176
169
165
147
143
230
219
214
207
200
196
191
184
177
173
154
150
240
228
223
216
209
204
199
192
185
180
161
156
250
238
233
225
218
213
208
200
193
188
168
163
260
247
242
234
226
221
206
208
200
195
174
169
270
257
251
243
235
230
224
216
208
203
181
176
280
266
260
252
244
238
232
224
216
210
188
182
290
276
270
261
252
247
241
232
223
218
194
189
300
285
279
270
261
255
249
240
231
225
201
195
310
295
288
279
270
264
257
248
239
233
208
202
320
304
298
288
278
272
266
256
246
240
214
208
330
314
307
297
287
281
274
264
254
248
221
215
340
323
316
306
296
289
282
272
262
255
228
221
350
333
326
315
305
298
291
280
270
263
235
228
360
342
335
324
313
306
299
288
277
270
241
234
Maximum repetitions (RM)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
15
%1RM
370
352
344
333
322
315
307
296
285
278
248
241
Load (pounds or kilograms)
380
361
353
342
331
323
315
304
293
285
255
247
390
371
363
351
339
332
324
312
300
293
261
254
400
380
372
360
348
340
332
320
308
300
268
260
Data from Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Mayhew et al. (1992).
1230

410
390
381
369
357
349
340
328
316
308
274
267
420
399
391
378
365
357
349
336
323
315
281
273
430
409
400
387
374
366
357
344
331
323
288
280
440
418
409
396
383
374
365
352
339
330
295
286
450
428
419
405
392
383
374
360
347
338
302
293
460
437
428
414
400
391
382
368
354
345
308
299
470
447
437
423
409
400
390
376
362
353
315
306
480
456
446
432
418
408
398
384
370
360
322
312
490
466
456
441
426
417
407
392
377
368
328
319
500
475
465
450
435
425
415
400
385
375
335
325
510
485
474
459
444
434
423
408
393
383
342
332
520
494
484
468
452
442
432
416
400
390
348
338
530
504
493
477
461
451
440
424
408
398
355
345
540
513
502
486
470
459
448
432
416
405
362
351
550
523
512
495
479
468
457
440
424
413
369
358
560
532
521
504
487
476
465
448
431
420
375
364
570
542
530
513
496
485
473
456
439
428
382
371
580
551
539
522
505
493
481
464
447
435
389
377
590
561
549
531
513
502
490
472
454
443
395
384
600
570
558
540
522
510
498
480
462
450
402
390
Data from Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Mayhew et al. (1992).
Rating of Perceived Exertion and Repetitions in
Reserve
Beyond percentages of 1RM, other methods of load prescription are available to
strength and conditioning professionals. The rating of perceived exertion
(RPE) provides a subjective measurement of work based on the perception of
an individual. While the original RPE scale (i.e., 6-20) was based on aerobic
activity (15), a modified CR10 scale (i.e., 0-10) has been examined by
researchers when monitoring resistance training exercise intensity within an
individual set (92, 135) and during entire training sessions (i.e., session RPE)
(37, 107, 181). Similarly, repetitions in reserve (RIR) provides a subjective
measure of the perceived number of repetitions that theoretically could be
performed following an exercise set (199). Hackett and colleagues (64, 66)
1231

displayed very large relationships between estimated RIR and actual RIR and
showed that RIR estimations become more accurate when exercise sets are
performed closer to failure. These findings are supported by additional
researchers (100, 198); thus, strength and conditioning professionals must
consider that the relative intensity of each exercise set may need to be higher
for this method to be useful for load prescription purposes.
When implementing RPE and RIR, it is recommended to prescribe intensities
in the form of ranges (e.g., RPE of 7-8 or RIR of 2-3) (176). Although relatively
few studies exist, some have shown that load prescription based on RPE for 8
weeks (73) and RIR for 12 weeks (60) may lead to greater strength
improvements compared to using percentages of 1RM. However, further studies
with additional athlete populations are needed before concrete conclusions can
be drawn. RPE and RIR may be best used if combined with an objective method
(e.g., percentage of 1RM) so that the desired loads for a given exercise can be
determined before using RPE/RIR to adjust the load for autoregulation purposes
(176). Professionals should note that the ability to gauge physical exertion may
vary based on athletic experience (4). For example, inexperienced athletes may
not understand what a near-maximal or maximal resistance training effort feels
like. Thus, strength and conditioning professionals should consider limiting load
autonomy until the athletes can display proficiency with the RPE and RIR
methods.
Set-Repetition Best
Originally proposed by Stone and O’Bryant (162), set-repetition best (SRB) is
a load prescription method that uses relative intensities (i.e., percent ranges)
where the maximum load is estimated based on performances of a given set and
repetition scheme. In other words, SRB determines loads based on percentages
of what was performed in training. Specifically, 5% ranges are prescribed to
allow strength and conditioning professionals to observe the performance of
their athletes and incorporate athlete feedback as a means of autoregulation.
Beyond the ability to adjust weekly training prescription, SRB allows specific
training loads to be estimated when prescribing different set and repetition
schemes (e.g., loads for 3 sets of 5 repetitions should be approximately 15%
less than 3 sets of 2 repetitions) (162, 176). Compared to prescribing xRM
percentages based on single sets, SRB is based on multiple sets so that an
athlete’s training loads are based on relative percentages of the prescribed set-
repetition scheme. Using SRB, any set-repetition scheme can be prescribed and
progressed using relative 5% ranges. For example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions or 3
sets of 10 repetitions can be prescribed with 85% to 90% of the respective
estimated maximal load for 3 sets of 5 or 3 sets of 10, respectively, in week 1 of
1232

a training phase and progress to 90% to 95% the following week. Within a
single week of training, heavy days are typically prescribed with loads
approximately 10% to 15% heavier than the lighter days of training (42). Thus,
SRB may account for the fatigue that accumulates across multiple sets during
training. This may allow training loads to be adjusted on a weekly basis without
the need to perform RM testing on a regular basis. Table 18.10 shows SRB
relative intensities as they relate to load effort of both RPE and RIR.
TABLE 18.10 Subjective Loading Efforts and Corresponding
Set-Repetition Best Relative Percentages
Load effort
Rating of perceived
exertion
Repetitions in reserve
Relative percentage
Maximal
10
0
No additional load
100
9.5
0
Could increase load
Very heavy
9
1
95-99
8.5
1-2
Heavy
8
2
90-94
7.5
2-3
Moderate-heavy
7
3
85-89
6-7
3-4
Moderate
5-6
4
80-84
4-5
Light-moderate
5
5
75-79
Light
4-5
5-6
70-74
Very light
3-4
Light effort
<70
Very, very light
1-2
Little or no effort
<60
Adapted by permission from S. McKeever and R. Howard, “Resistance Training,” in NSCA’s Guide to High
School Strength and Conditioning, edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by P.
McHenry and M. Nitka (Human Kinetics, 2022), 240 and M.C. Zourdos, A. Klemp, C. Dolan, et al., “Novel
Resistance Training-Specific Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale Measuring Repetitions in Reserve,” The
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 30, no. 1 (2016): 269. Adapted from DeWeese et al.
(2014).
A growing body of research supports the use of SRB as a method of load
prescription (17, 18, 79, 164, 171-173). Researchers have shown that SRB may
produce more favorable muscle architectural (e.g., type I and II hypertrophy and
1233

myosin heavy chain adaptations) and strength (e.g., isometric peak and rapid
force production) adaptations compared to RM training (17, 18). Like other
methods of load prescription, strength and conditioning professionals should
take a conservative approach before progressing to heavier loads. Beyond the
initial weeks of training, previous training blocks may be used as starting points
for upcoming blocks. For example, the heaviest loads used during a general
strength block (e.g., 3 sets of 6 repetitions) may serve as the starting loads for
an absolute strength block (e.g., 3 sets of 3 repetitions). Readers are directed to
previous literature for more thorough information on SRB (162, 176).
Assigning Load and Repetitions Based on the
Training Goal
During the needs analysis, the strength and conditioning professional is
challenged to choose the primary goal of the resistance training program based
on the athlete’s testing results, the movement and physiological analysis of the
sport, and the priorities of the athlete’s sport season. Once decided on, the
training goal can be applied to determine specific load and repetition
assignments via the RM continuum and the chosen loading method. As
explained previously, the testing methods determine how the loads and
repetitions are assigned for each exercise (i.e., loads are calculated as a
percentage of a tested or estimated 1RM, or training loads are specifically
determined from xRM testing). The options for testing and assigning training
loads and repetitions are summarized in figure 18.9.
1234

FIGURE 18.9 Summary of testing and assigning training loads and repetitions.
Reprinted by permission from R.W. Earle, “Weight Training Exercise Prescription,” in Essentials of Personal Training Symposium Workbook
(NSCA Certification Commission, 2006), 3-39.
Repetition Maximum Continuum
Figure 18.10 represents how RM ranges have been historically associated with
training goals. In general, relatively heavy loads should be used if the goal is
maximal strength, whereas light loads should be used to develop muscular
endurance. To state this another way, low xRMs appear to have the greatest
effect on maximal strength and high xRMs seem to result in better muscular
endurance improvements (65, 106, 141). In contrast to strength and muscular
endurance, a spectrum of RM loads may be used to develop muscle hypertrophy.
For example, researchers have reported that similar magnitudes of hypertrophy
can be produced after eight weeks of training when using either a low-load (25-
1235

35 repetitions performed to failure with approximately 30%-50% 1RM) or high-
load (8-12 repetitions performed with approximately 70%-80% 1RM) training
protocol that is performed to muscular failure (144). The same research group
followed up this study with a meta-analysis that showed no difference in muscle
hypertrophy changes following various training protocols performed to muscular
failure using lighter (<60% 1RM) and heavier (>60% 1RM) loads (141). As
greater muscle activation was shown during multiple heavier versus lighter (i.e.,
80% vs. 30% 1RM) sets performed to failure (82), high-load, lower-repetition
sets may be considered more efficient at producing hypertrophic adaptations
and benefiting muscular strength due to the neural adaptations associated with
this characteristic (1). Strength and conditioning professionals should also be
cautious in prescribing multiple low-load sets to failure to mitigate potential
injury (109).
FIGURE 18.10 Classic continuum that shows how RM ranges are associated with various training goals.
*The repetition ranges shown for power in this figure are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition
relationship. Refer to the discussion of assigning percentages for power training for further explanation.
Therefore, while the classic RM continuum effectively illustrates that a certain
RM zone emphasizes a specific outcome, the training benefits may be blended at
any given RM. However, figure 18.11 represents an updated version of the RM
continuum that is supported by the emerging literature.
1236

FIGURE 18.11 RM continuum that shows how RM ranges emphasize different training goals while
accounting for the expansive range of loads that can be used for hypertrophy.
* The repetition ranges shown for hypertrophy may vary depending on the set and repetition scheme as
well as the loads used (141, 187).
Adapted from Stone et al. (1982) and Fleck and Kraemer (2014).
Percentage of the 1RM
Despite the physiological blend of training effects, the specificity principle still
dictates the dominant outcome that is attained and enhanced with a particular
training load. The relationship between the percentage of the 1RM and the
estimated number of repetitions that can be performed at that load (table 18.8,
page 544) allows the strength and conditioning professional to assign a specific
resistance to be used for an exercise in a training session. In other words, the
training goal is attained when the athlete lifts a load of a certain percentage of
the 1RM for a specific number of repetitions (table 18.11).
TABLE 18.11 Load and Repetition Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal
Load (%1RM)
Goal reps
Strengtha
≥85
≤6
Multiple-effortb event
75-85
3-5
aThese RM loading assignments for muscular strength training apply only to core exercises; assistance
exercises should be limited to loads not heavier than an 8RM (2).
bBased on weightlifting-derived movements (e.g., clean and snatch). The load and repetition assignments
shown for power in this table are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition relationship. In nonexplosive
movements, loads equaling about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range. Refer to the
discussion of assigning percentages of the 1RM for power training for further explanation.
Data from Berger (1962); Peterson et al. (2004); Peterson et al. (2005); Swinton et al. (2024); Tesch
(1992).
1237

Hypertrophy
67-80
8-12
Muscular endurance
≤67
≥12
aThese RM loading assignments for muscular strength training apply only to core exercises; assistance
exercises should be limited to loads not heavier than an 8RM (2).
bBased on weightlifting-derived movements (e.g., clean and snatch). The load and repetition assignments
shown for power in this table are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition relationship. In nonexplosive
movements, loads equaling about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range. Refer to the
discussion of assigning percentages of the 1RM for power training for further explanation.
Data from Berger (1962); Peterson et al. (2004); Peterson et al. (2005); Swinton et al. (2024); Tesch
(1992).
How to Calculate a Training Load If an athlete’s training goal is muscular
strength and the tested 1RM in the bench press exercise is 220 pounds (100 kg),
to increase strength, the athlete needs to handle loads of at least 85% of the
1RM (after warm-up) that typically allow performance of up to 6 repetitions
within a single set (table 18.11). More specifically, if the strength and
conditioning professional assigns 4 repetitions for this exercise, the
corresponding load could be approximately 90% of the 1RM (table 18.8), or
approximately 200 pounds (91 kg). Note that the strength and conditioning
professional should make adjustments to the assigned loads based on
observation of the ease or difficulty an athlete experiences in lifting the load for
the required repetitions. Moreover, it is important to avoid training to failure on a
regular basis because it may not be necessary to maximize muscular
hypertrophy, strength, or power adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). By minimizing
training to failure, strength and conditioning professionals may reduce the
overall training strain on athletes while still providing an effective training
stimulus and maximizing performance gains (17, 18).
Assigning Percentages for Power Training The force–velocity curve
illustrates that the greater the amount of concentric muscular force generated,
the slower the muscle shortening and corresponding movement velocity (and
vice versa). Maximal power, in contrast, may be produced at intermediate
velocities with the lifting of light to moderate loads in nonballistic, traditional
resistance training exercises such as the squat or bench press (27, 105, 154,
157). Performing a 1RM involves slower movement velocities; near-maximal
forces are generated but with reduced power output (56, 197). Seldom is an
athlete required to demonstrate a singular, maximal, slow-speed muscular
strength effort in a sport (except in powerlifting, for example). Most sport
movements are faster and involve higher power outputs than those produced
during a 1RM test (89, 118). This does not mean that an athlete’s power
capabilities are unaffected by maximal muscular strength training, however.
1238

Because speed- or power-related sport movements often begin from zero or
near-zero velocities, slow-velocity strength gains have direct application to rapid
force development and power production (1, 22). For these reasons, the load
and repetition assignments for power training overlap the guidelines for strength
training (table 18.11).
Non-weightlifting, multijoint power exercises (e.g., jump squat, bench press
throw, overhead press throw) and single-joint muscle action data reveal that
peak power is generally reached with the lifting of very light loads—from body
weight (0%) to 30% of the 1RM (27, 105, 154, 157, 174, 175). Performing some
of these exercises (e.g., bench press throw and overhead press throw) in a
Smith machine, for example, can help to address the safety issues. On the other
end of the load continuum, data from multiple national- and world-class
weightlifting and powerlifting championships clearly indicate that power output
increases as the weight lifted decreases from 100% of the 1RM (i.e., the 1RM)
to 90% of the 1RM (56). In fact, for the back squat and deadlift exercises,
power output for a load at 90% of the 1RM may be twice as high as with the
1RM load due to a large decrease in the time required to complete the exercise
with the lighter load (57). Even for the already “fast” power exercises
(weightlifting-based movements), there is still a 5% to 10% increase in power
output as the load decreases from the 1RM to 90% of the 1RM (57). Considering
these issues, the most effective and practical application is to assign loads that
are about 75% to 90% of the 1RM for resistance training exercises that can be
heavily loaded such as the snatch and clean and other weightlifting-derived
movements (27, 56, 105). However, the loading that maximizes power output in
weightlifting movements and their derivatives is exercise specific. For example,
the highest power outputs of catching variations (e.g., hang power clean and
power clean) were shown between 60% and 80% 1RM (20, 83, 85, 168), while
pulling derivatives may maximize power output at either lighter (i.e., <50% 1RM
of a catching variation) (86, 167, 169, 179, 180) or at much heavier loads (i.e.,
100%-120% 1RM) (23, 25, 111, 112, 115) depending on the velocity (e.g., jump
shrug and hang high pull) or force potential (e.g., countermovement shrug, mid-
thigh pull, hang pull) of the exercises, respectively. Strength and conditioning
professionals should also not overlook the use of overhead pressing derivatives
(e.g., push press and jerk) for developing power output (156). Researchers have
shown that maximal power output during the jerk and back jerk occurred
between 80% and 90% 1RM of the respective exercises in competitive
weightlifters (51). However, strength and conditioning professionals should note
that there were no differences in power output or other kinetic variables
between the push press, push jerk, and split jerk using 80% of the 1RM push
press in resistance-trained men and women (155).
1239

To promote program specificity, particular load and repetition assignments are
indicated for athletes training for single-effort power events (e.g., shot put, high
jump, weightlifting) and for multiple-effort power events (e.g., basketball and
volleyball). For example, single-effort-event athletes may be assigned sets of 1
or 2 repetitions using loads that equal 80% to 90% of the 1RM, especially on
heavy training days. For sports with multiple maximum-power efforts (e.g., the
frequent maximum vertical jumping motions of a volleyball blocker), 3 to 5
repetitions per set with loads at 75% to 85% of the 1RM may be most
appropriate. However, strength and conditioning professionals should consider
the training season that the athlete is currently in to ensure that fatigue is being
appropriately managed.
On the basis of the %1RM–repetition relationships shown in table 18.8 (page
544), the strength and conditioning professional may question the load
assignments for power training in table 18.11. The %1RM loads may appear to
be too low compared to the goal number of repetitions. For example, according
to table 18.8, 3 to 5 repetitions are typically associated with loads 93% to 87%
of the 1RM, not 75% to 85% of the 1RM or less as table 18.11 indicates. Power
exercises cannot be maximally loaded at any repetition scheme, because the
quality of the movement technique will decline before momentary muscle fatigue
defines a true xRM set (71). Therefore, lighter loads allow the athlete to
complete repetitions with maximum speed to promote maximum power
development. For example, power exercises are usually limited to 5 repetitions
per set, but with loads up to and equal to a 10RM (i.e., approximately 75% of
the 1RM). This load adjustment to promote peak power output also applies to
the RM continuum (figure 18.10, page 551). Power training can be emphasized
across the range of 5 repetitions or fewer, but the strength and conditioning
professional should realize that these loads are not true RMs. However, exercises
with a smaller displacement (e.g., countermovement shrug and hang pull) may
allow the performance of at least 6 repetitions with supramaximal loads (>100%
1RM power clean) without decreases in force production characteristics or
changes in technique across repetitions (113, 114).
Variation of the Training Load
Training for muscular strength and power places a high physiological stress on
an athlete’s body. Intermediate and advanced resistance-trained athletes are
accustomed to lifting heavy loads and possess the experience and motivation to
exert to near failure during every set, but this should not always be the goal.
Despite the high training status, this degree of training demand typically cannot
be tolerated very long without contributing to an overtrained state (176). For
example, an athlete may resistance train three days a week with muscular
1240

strength as the goal (e.g., Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays). It would be
difficult for the athlete to perform the same high-load, low-volume regimen—
especially in the power and other core exercises—with only one or two days of
rest between sessions. As noted previously, training to failure may not be
necessary to promote the desired training adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191).
One strategy to counterbalance the monotony associated with lifting heavy
loads is to alter the loads (%1RMs) for the power and other core exercises so
that only one training day each week (e.g., Monday) is a heavy day. These
heavy-day loads are designed to be high but usually with 1 to 2 RIR to avoid
training to failure. The loads for the other training days are reduced
(intentionally) to avoid an excessive accumulation of fatigue after the heavy day
while still maintaining sufficient training frequency and volume. In the example
of the three-days-a-week program, Wednesday can still serve as another heavy
training day (depending on the organization of workouts) (table 18.5, page 538),
while Friday may serve as the light day of the week in which 80% of the loads
lifted in the power and other core exercises on the heavy day (Monday) are
performed with the same number of goal repetitions. Even if the athlete is able
to perform more repetitions than the designated goal number, he or she should
not do so. This approach can be used for any training frequency. For instance, a
two-days-a-week program could have a heavy day and a light day, or a lower
body–upper body split routine could consist of two heavy days (one lower body
day and one upper body day) followed by two lighter days. Varying the training
loads also works well with an athlete’s other training, in that heavy lifting days
can fall on light sport conditioning days, and light lifting days on heavy sport
conditioning days (42). The strength and conditioning professional needs to
monitor this schedule so that it does not lead to heavy training every day.
Progression of Load
As the athlete adapts to the training stimulus, the strength and conditioning
professional needs to have a strategy for advancing exercise loads (intensity or
volume depending on the specific goal) so that improvements will continue over
time (progression). Monitoring each athlete’s training and charting his or her
response to the prescribed workouts enable the strength and conditioning
professional to know when and to what extent the loads should be increased.
Timing Load Increases
A conservative method that can be used to increase an athlete’s training loads is
called the 2-for-2 rule (2). If the athlete can perform 2 or more repetitions
over his or her assigned repetition goal for a given exercise in the last set in two
consecutive workouts, weight should be added to that exercise for the next
1241

training session. For example, a strength and conditioning professional assigns 3
sets of 6 repetitions in the bench press exercise, and the athlete performs all 6
repetitions in all sets. After several workout sessions (the specific number
depends on many factors), the athlete can complete 8 repetitions in the third
(last) set for two consecutive workouts. In the following training session, the
load for that exercise should be increased. While the 2-for-2 rule may provide
strength and conditioning professionals with a tool to progress load in novice
athletes, this method may eventually promote training to failure because it does
not account for exercise technique, the goals of a given training phase, or
relative intensity. For example, if an athlete modifies his or her technique just to
achieve additional repetitions, an increase in load may not be warranted until
exercise technique becomes more stable. Moreover, programming that allows for
additional repetitions to be performed (i.e., not to failure) may be by design
(176). In this instance, strength and conditioning professionals may plan for
athletes to perform additional repetitions beyond the amount prescribed (i.e.,
RIR) with the goal of providing an overload stimulus while managing fatigue.
Thus, it is advised that the professionals understand the limitations of the 2-for-
2 rule when adjusting the load during training.
Quantity of Load Increases
The decision as to the magnitude of the load increase can be difficult to make,
but table 18.12 provides general recommendations based on the athlete’s
condition (stronger or weaker) and body area (upper or lower body). Despite
these guidelines, the significant variation in training status, volume–loads, and
exercises (type and muscular involvement) greatly influences the appropriate
load increases. To contend with this variability, relative load increases of 2.5% to
10% can be used instead of the absolute values shown in table 18.12. However,
load changes should be specific to the exercise, loading type (e.g., free weights,
elastic bands, dumbbells), and the method of load progression (e.g., percentage
of 1RM, RPE, RIR, SRB).
TABLE 18.12 Examples of Load Increases
Description of the athletea
Body area exercise
Estimated load increaseb
Set-repetition
best increasesc
Weaker, less trained
Upper body
2.5-5 lb (1-2 kg)
5%
aThe strength and conditioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjective categories applies to a specific athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain constant as the
loads are increased.
cA planned increase per week, but it will be phase specific, could be larger increases.
1242

Lower body
5-10 lb (2-4 kg)
5%
Stronger, more trained
Upper body
5-10+ lb (2-4+ kg)
5%
Lower body
10-15+ lb (4-7+ kg)
5%
aThe strength and conditioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjective categories applies to a specific athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain constant as the
loads are increased.
cA planned increase per week, but it will be phase specific, could be larger increases.
Application of the Training Load and Repetition
Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school
cross country
runner
Preseason
PRIMARY IN-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Strength/power
PRIMARY OFF-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Hypertrophy
PRIMARY
PRESEASON
RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Muscular
endurance
TESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
Power exercises: 75%-85% of the 1RM;
3-5 repsa
Other core exercises: >85% of the 1RM;
<6 reps
Assistance exercises: limited to loads not
heavier than an 8RM
TESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
67%-80% of the 1RM; 8-12 reps
TESTING AND
ASSIGNING
LOADS AND
REPS
Influence of the
training goals
<67% of the 1RM;
>12 reps
Number of goal reps
Power exercises: 3
Core exercises: 4
Assistance exercises: 8
Number of goal reps
Core exercises: 10
Assistance exercises: 10
Number of goal
reps
Core exercises: 12
Assistance
exercises: 15
Testing methods
3RM testing for power exercisesb
Push jerk
Testing methods
1RM testing for core exercises
Deadlift
Testing methods
6RM testing for
core exercises
1243

Hang power clean
1RM testing for other core
exercisesc
Front squat
Incline bench press
Seated row
8RM testing for assistance
exercisesd
Dumbbell alternating curl
Triceps pushdown
Back squati
Bench pressi
Shoulder pressi
10RM testing for new assistance
exercisesj
Step-up
Seated calf (heel) raise
Bent-over row
Shoulder shrug
Hexagonal barbell
deadlift
Lunge
Vertical chest press
8RM testing for
new assistance
exercises
One-arm dumbbell
row
Lateral shoulder
raise
Testing results
3RM hang power  115 lb (52 kg)
clean
Estimated 1RMe  124 lb (56 kg)
3RM push jerk  110 lb (50 kg)
Estimated 1RMe  118 lb (54 kg)
1RM front squat  185 lb (84 kg)
1RM incline bench  100 lb (45 kg)
press
1RM seated row  120 lb (54 kg)
8RM dumbbell  25 lb (11 kg)
alternating curl
8RM triceps  50 lb (23 kg) pushdown
Testing results
1RM deadlift  650 lb (295 kg)
1RM back squat  675 lb (306 kg)
1RM bench press  425 lb (193 kg)
1RM shoulder press  255 lb (116 kg)
10RM step-up  205 lb (93 kg)
10RM seated calf  155 lb (70 kg)
(heel) raise
10RM bent-over row  215 lb (98 kg)
10RM shoulder  405 lb (184 kg) shrug
Testing results
6RM hexagonal
barbell deadlift  
135 lb (61 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  160 lb
(73 kg)
6RM lunge  100
lb (45 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  120 lb
(54 kg)
6RM vertical
chest  85 lb (39
kg) press
Estimated
1RMe  100 lb
(45 kg)
8RM one-arm  
35 lb (16 kg)
dumbbell row
8RM lateral  15
lb (7 kg) shoulder
raise
Training loads
For power exercises:
Assign 75% of the estimated 1RM
Push jerk  90 lb (41 kg)
Hang power clean  95 lb (43 kg)
(All loads are rounded off to the nearest
5 lb.)
For other core exercises:
Assign 85% of the tested 1RM
Front squat  155 lb (70 kg)
Incline bench press  85 lb (39 kg)
Seated row  120 lb (54 kg)
Training loads
For core exercises:
Assign 70% of the tested 1RM
Deadlift  490 lb (222 kg)
Back squat  505 lb (229 kg)
Bench press  320 lb (145 kg)
Shoulder press  190 lb (86 kg)
(All loads are rounded off to the nearest 5
lb.)
For assistance exercises:
Assign loads less than the loads from the
10RM testingg or
Training loads
For core exercises:
Assign <67% of
the estimated 1RM
For assistance
exercises:
Assign loads less
than the loads
from 8RM testingg
1244

(All loads are rounded off to the nearest
5 lb.)
For assistance exercises:
Assign loads less than the loads from
8RM testingg
Equal to the loads used in the postseason
Leg (knee) curl  190 lb (86 kg)
Barbell biceps curl  115 lb (52 kg)
Lying triceps  125 lb (57 kg) extension
Weekly loading regimen (power/core
exercises)f
Mondays (“heavy” push day)
Assign the full load assignments
(calculated under “Training loads”)
Wednesdays (“heavy” pull day)
Assign the full load assignments
(calculated under “Training loads”)
Fridays (“light” mix day)
Assign only 80% of Monday’s and
Wednesday’s “heavy day” loads if
exercises are repeatedh
Weekly loading regimen includes a
heavy and light emphasis on the lower
and upper body days
Mondays (“Heavy” lower body day)
Tuesdays (“Heavy” upper body day)
Thursdays (“Light” lower body day)
Fridays (“Light” upper body day)
Assign 80%-85% of the heavy day loads
during the light day training sessionsh
COMMENTS
aThe load and rep assignments shown
for power exercises are based on
basketball, a multiple-effort event, and
are not consistent with the %1RM–
repetition relationship.
bTo test for power, an xRM (3RM)
protocol is used. From the result, the
1RM is estimated and load assignments
are made by calculating a percent of the
estimated 1RM.
cThe athlete performed these exercises
in the preseason, but to raise the
accuracy of the load assignments for the
in-season, the athlete will be tested to
determine the current 1RM.
dEven though some of these exercises
were part of the preseason program,
they all require xRM testing because the
in-season goal reps for these exercises is
8, rather than 10 from the previous
season.
eEstimate the 1RM using table 18.9.
fThe loads for the assistance exercises
remain constant throughout the week;
only the loads for the power and other
core exercises change.
gPrescribing loads that are submaximal
to the xRM testing will help athletes
avoid consistent training to failure.
COMMENTS
iThe athlete performed these exercises in
the postseason, but to raise the accuracy
of the load assignments for the off-
season, the athlete will be tested to
determine the current 1RM.
jThe exercises shown here were selected
as new exercises for the off-season
program and therefore require 10RM
testing. The other assistance exercises
were carried over from the postseason
and do not require testing because the
load and rep assignments will be identical.
1245

hPrescribing heavy and light loads with
the same exercises during the week may
help manage fatigue and prevent
consistently training to failure. Even if
the athlete is able to, do not allow more
reps than the designated goal number
(power, 3; other core, 4).
1246

Step 6: Volume
Volume–load relates to the total amount of weight lifted in a training session,
and a set is a group of repetitions sequentially performed before the athlete
stops to rest. Repetition-volume is the total number of repetitions performed
during a workout session, and volume–load is the total number of sets multiplied
by the number of repetitions per set, then multiplied by the weight lifted per
repetition. For example, the volume–load for 2 sets of 10 repetitions with 50
pounds (23 kg) would be expressed as 2 × 10 × 50 pounds or 1,000 pounds
(454 kg). (If different sets are performed with different amounts of weight, the
volumes per set are calculated and then added to obtain the total training
session volume.)
In running exercise, the common (rep) volume measure is distance. If an
intensity value is known or measured (e.g., running pace, which relates to
percent V̇O2max), total metabolic energy cost (which is proportional to
mechanical work done) can be calculated. This value is comparable to volume–
load in resistance exercise. The same concepts are applicable to the number of
foot or hand contacts (volume) in plyometric exercise (note that the intensity is
not considered when counting contacts but should be considered carefully by the
coach), the number of strokes (volume) in swimming or rowing, or the number
of throws or jumps (volume) for various sport activities.
Single Versus Multiple Sets
Single-set training may be appropriate for untrained individuals (50) or during
the first several months of training (61), but many studies indicate that higher
volumes are necessary to promote further gains in strength, especially for
intermediate and advanced resistance-trained athletes (126, 177, 182). For
example, performing 3 sets of 10 repetitions without going to failure enhances
strength better than one set to failure in 8 to 12 repetitions (90), although the
higher training volume with the use of 3 sets is a contributing factor (50, 162).
Therefore, an athlete who performs multiple sets from the initiation of their
resistance training program will increase muscular strength faster than with
single-set training (90). The strength and conditioning professional cannot
expect, however, that an athlete will be able to successfully complete multiple
sets with full RM loads at fixed repetition schemes for every exercise in each
training session. Fatigue will affect the number of repetitions that can be
performed in later sets (116, 150), which is why a RIR approach may be
advantageous. It should also be noted that training to failure is not necessary for
optimal adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). Refalo and colleagues (132) also
demonstrated that the closer the proximity to failure, the greater the magnitude
1247

of fatigue over the subsequent 24 hours, which should be carefully considered in
relation to the additional training planned for that period. As such, this also
highlights a limitation of the RIR approach, in that it has been clearly
demonstrated that the further away from failure, the less accurate the RIR
approach is (6, 70).
Training Status
The training status of athletes affects the volume they will be able to safely
tolerate. It is appropriate for an athlete to perform only 1 or 2 sets as a beginner
and to add sets as he or she becomes better trained. As the athlete adapts to a
consistent and well-designed program, more sets can be added gradually to
match the guidelines associated with the given training goal.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
Training volume is directly based on the athlete’s resistance training goal. Table
18.13 provides a summary of the guidelines for the number of repetitions and
sets commonly associated with strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular
endurance training programs. When programming weightlifting exercises and
their derivatives, loads and the associated repetition schemes may vary from
other forms of power training, because weightlifting pulling derivatives (i.e.,
those that exclude the catch phase) permit loads greater than the 1RM
associated with the catching variation (21). In addition, reduced displacement
during some of these exercises (i.e., countermovement shrug, hang pull, power
clean) also permits the performance of 6 repetitions without decreases in
velocity of power across repetitions (113, 114) (table 18.14).
TABLE 18.13 Volume Assignments Based on the Training Goal
Training
goal
Goal repetitions
Setsa
NOVICE
INTERMEDIATE
ADVANCED
NOVICE
INTERMEDIATE
ADVANCED
Strength
≤6
≤6
≤6
1-3
≥3
≥3
Power: b
n/a
1-3
1-3
n/a
1-3
3-6
aThese assignments do not include warm-up sets and typically apply to core exercises only.
bBased on weightlifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown for power in this table are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition relationship. In
nonexplosive movements, loads equaling about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning percentages of the 1RM for power training for further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexity is reduced (113, 114), or if cluster sets are used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertrophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 repetitions).
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Tesch (1992).
1248

Single-effort
event
Multiple-
effort event
n/a
3-6c
3-6c
n/a
1-3c
3-6c
Hypertrophy
8-12
6-12
3-12
1-3
≥3
≥3d
Muscular
endurance
12-15
12-15
12-25
1-3
≥3
≥3
aThese assignments do not include warm-up sets and typically apply to core exercises only.
bBased on weightlifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown for power in this table are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition relationship. In
nonexplosive movements, loads equaling about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning percentages of the 1RM for power training for further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexity is reduced (113, 114), or if cluster sets are used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertrophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 repetitions).
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Tesch (1992).
Strength and Power
In classic research, DeLorme (39) and DeLorme and Watkins (40) recommended
sets of 10 repetitions as ideal to increase muscular strength, although the
regimen was originally developed for injury rehabilitation. Later, Berger (9, 10)
determined that 3 sets of 6 repetitions created maximal strength gains, at least
in the bench press and back squat exercises. Although Berger’s work seemed to
be conclusive, his subsequent research (11) showed no significant difference
among 6 sets of a 2RM load, 3 sets of a 6RM load, and 3 sets of a 10RM load,
despite the differences in volume. Since then, the results of many other studies
have also been unable to support an exact set and repetition scheme to promote
maximal increases in strength; however, these inconclusive findings may be the
result of a mixture of relatively untrained and trained subjects, as well as varying
programming tactics.
When training an athlete for strength, assigning volume begins with an
examination of the optimal number of repetitions for maximal strength gains. As
discussed earlier (and shown in figure 18.10 and table 18.11), this appears to be
sets of 6 or fewer repetitions (at the corresponding RM load [≥85% 1RM]) for
core exercises (125, 182). Peterson and colleagues (125, 126) also highlighted a
dose–response relationship based on the number of sets performed per muscle
group: 8 sets per muscle group elicited the greatest increases in strength, with
loads of 85% of the 1RM. More recently, similar conclusions were made by
Swinton and colleagues (182) based on the results of their meta-analysis of the
dose–response to resistance training. Specific set guidelines based on exercise
1249

type suggest that only 1 to 3 sets may be appropriate or necessary for
assistance exercises (2).
Volume assignments for power training are typically lower than those for
strength training to maximize the quality of exercise. This reduction in volume
results from fewer goal repetitions and lighter loads (figure 18.10 and table
18.11) rather than the recommended number of sets (30, 68, 105). The
common guideline is 3 to 5 sets (after warm-up) for power exercises included in
a trained athlete’s program (161).
TABLE 18.14 Weightlifting Exercises and Derivatives,
Including Recommended Intensities and Repetition Ranges
Catching
derivativesa
Load
(reps)
Pulling derivativesb
Load (reps)
Overhead
pressing
derivatives
Load
(reps)
Mid-thigh clean;
snatch
60%-80%
1RM (2-5)
Mid-thigh pull;
countermovement
shrug
100%-140%
1RM (4-6c,d)
Push press
70%-90%
1RM (2-5)
Clean; snatch
from the knee
70%-90%
1RM (2-5)
Pull from the knee;
hang pull
Push jerk
Hang clean;
snatchc
Pull from the floor
80%-120%
1RM (2-6d)
Split jerk
Clean; snatch
Hang high pull
45%-60% 1RM
(4-6)
Behind the neck
push press/jerkb
Jump shrug
30%-45% 1RM
(4-6)
Behind the neck
split jerkb
aAll clean and snatch variations can be performed with a partial squat (power) or full squat catch.
bThe derivatives may be performed with either a clean or snatch grip.
cSix reps can be performed with no decrease in velocity or power between reps (113, 114).
dHigher reps may be performed provided that the technique of the exercise is maintained (91, 141).
Note: Variations from mid-thigh and the knee can start with the barbell resting on blocks, or with the
athlete holding the barbell and lowering to the start position and briefly pausing. Currently, there is
minimal research comparing the kinetics or kinematics of these variations.
Adapted from Comfort et al. (2023). Data from Kirksey and Stone (1998); Scala et al. (1987).
Hypertrophy
It is generally accepted that higher training volumes are associated with
increases in muscular size (96, 139, 143). This is the result of both a moderate
to higher number of repetitions per set (8-12; see figure 18.10 and table 18.11)
and the commonly recommended 3 to 6 sets per exercise (91, 123). However,
there does not appear to be a meaningful difference in training-induced
hypertrophy of a specific muscle group between higher and lower frequencies
1250

when volume is matched (140). Furthermore, it has been reported that there are
no differences in hypertrophic adaptations following low (<60% 1RM) or high
(>60% 1RM) load training programs (141). Thus, it is important that strength
and conditioning professionals understand that heavy loads (i.e., >80% 1RM)
can be used to train muscle hypertrophy rather than only maximal strength
characteristics. In fact, the use of heavier loads may target specific fibers and
higher threshold motor units (i.e., type II) to a greater extent than lighter loads
(82, 106, 158), which in turn may allow for greater force, rapid force, and power
output adaptations in future training blocks (187). Thus, it has been suggested
that using heavier loads to target hypertrophic adaptations may be more
beneficial to strength and power athletes (53, 97). However, it is also important
to adjust the number of sets and repetitions compared to traditional hypertrophy
prescription; for example, strength and conditioning professionals could
prescribe 10 sets of 3 repetitions when using heavier loads compared to the
more traditional 3 sets of 10 repetitions typically prescribed when targeting
hypertrophy. Moreover, caution should be taken when prescribing training in this
manner because the volume–loads can be quite high and the time it may take to
complete a given exercise with proper rest periods between sets may lead to
lengthy training sessions. Therefore, it is suggested that users do not implement
this set and repetitions scheme with every exercise.
Muscular Endurance
Resistance training programs that emphasize muscular endurance involve
performing many repetitions—12 or more—per set (160, 161). Despite this
relatively high repetition assignment, the overall volume–load is not necessarily
overly inflated since the loads lifted are lighter and fewer sets are performed,
commonly 2 or 3 per exercise.
Application of the Volume Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power exercises  3 sets of 3 reps
Other core  3 sets of 4 reps exercises
Assistance  2 sets of 8 reps exercises
(The number of sets does not include
warm-ups.)
Core exercises  3 sets of 10
  reps
Assistance  3 sets of 10
exercises  reps
(The number of sets does not
include warm-ups.)
Core exercises  3 sets of 12
  reps
Assistance  2 sets of 15
exercises   reps
(The number of sets does not
include warm-ups.)
1251

MONDAY
Push jerk  3 × 3a
Front squat  3 × 4
Incline bench press  3 × 4
Triceps pushdown  3 × 8
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3 × 3
Romanian deadlift  3 × 4
Seated row  3 × 4
Dumbbell  3 × 8 alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3 × 3
Rear leg–elevated  3 × 4 split-squat
Pull-up  3 × 4
Single-leg stiff-  3 × 4 legged
deadlift
LOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadlift  3 × 10
Back squat  3 × 10
Step-up  3 × 10
Leg (knee) curl  3 × 10
Seated calf (heel)   3 × 10
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench press  3 × 10
Bent-over row  3 × 10
Shoulder press  3 × 10
Barbell biceps curl  3 × 10
Shoulder shrug  3 × 10
Lying triceps  3 × 10
extension
Abdominal crunch  3 × 20
WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbell  3 × 12
deadlift
Vertical chest press  3 × 12
One-arm dumbbell  3 × 12
row
Abdominal crunch  2 × 20
Machine back  2 × 15
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  3 × 12
Lateral shoulder  3 × 12
raise
Single-leg stiff-  3 × 12
legged deadlift
Toe raise  3 × 12
(dorsiflexion)
Abdominal crunch  2 × 20
Machine back  2 × 15
extension
COMMENTS
aRepresented as sets × repetitions here
and in scenarios A, B, and C.
1252

Step 7: Rest Periods
The time dedicated to recovery between sets and exercises is called the rest
period or inter-set rest. The length of the rest period between sets and
exercises is highly dependent on the goal of training, the relative load lifted, and
the athlete’s training status. (If the athlete is not in good physical condition, rest
periods initially may need to be longer than typically assigned.)
The amount of rest between sets is strongly related to load; the heavier the
loads lifted, the longer the rest periods the athlete will need between sets to
safely and successfully complete the prescribed subsequent sets and to promote
higher quality training. For example, training for muscular strength with 4RM
loads would likely require significantly longer rest periods between sets than
training for muscular endurance in which lighter 15RM loads are lifted. Despite
the relationship between training goals and the length of rest periods (e.g., long
rest periods for muscular strength training programs), not all exercises in a
resistance training program should be assigned the same rest periods. It is
important that the strength and conditioning professional allocate rest periods
based on the relative load lifted and the amount of muscle mass involved in
each exercise. An example of this specificity is for an assistance exercise as part
of a muscular strength training program. Whereas a core exercise such as the
bench press may involve a 4RM load and a 4-minute rest period, an assistance
exercise such as the lateral shoulder raise may be performed with a 12RM load
and therefore require only a 1-minute rest period (even though 1-min rest
periods generally apply to a hypertrophy training program). The recommended
rest period lengths for strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular endurance
programs are shown in table 18.15.
TABLE 18.15 Rest Period Length Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal*
Rest period length
Strength
2-5 min
Power (single- and multiple-effort event)
2-5 min
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and conditioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than generally
applying the guidelines for a training goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); Schoenfeld et al. (2016); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); Tesch et al. (1986).
1253

Hypertrophy
2-3 min for multijoint exercises; 60-90 s for single-joint
exercises
Muscular endurance
≤30 s
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and conditioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than generally
applying the guidelines for a training goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); Schoenfeld et al. (2016); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); Tesch et al. (1986).
Strength and Power
Training may enhance an athlete’s ability to exercise with less rest, but athletes
who seek to perform maximal or near-maximal repetitions with a heavy load
usually need long rest periods, especially for lower body or all-body structural
exercises (149, 193). For example, Robinson and colleagues (136) observed
that, in the back squat exercise, 3 minutes of inter-set rest resulted in greater
strength gains than a 30-second rest period. Common guidelines for rest period
length range 2 to 5 minutes (50, 162, 163) because these rest periods have
been shown to permit greater volumes of work (194), allow for the use of
heavier loads (193), and result in greater maximal strength and power
adaptations (38, 136) compared to shorter rest intervals.
Hypertrophy
Athletes who are interested in gaining muscular size often use a short to
moderate inter-set rest period (50). In fact, earlier reviews of hypertrophy
training programs supported the use of shorter rest periods because it was
recommended that the athlete begin the next set before full recovery has been
achieved (72, 184). Despite this, the high metabolic demand of exercises
involving large muscle groups merits consideration (i.e., extra recovery time)
when rest period lengths are being assigned (138, 185). While rest periods for
hypertrophy are typically 1.5 minutes or less, longer rest periods (i.e., 3 min)
have been shown to produced greater increases in muscle hypertrophy
compared to those that were shorter (i.e., 1 min) (145). Longer rest periods may
allow athletes to train with a higher overall volume–load that may coincide with
the use of heavier training loads (62), which may in turn increase time under
tension and the stimulus for hypertrophy. Thus, rest periods for training muscle
hypertrophy may exist on a spectrum depending on the loads used and the
targeted mechanism of hypertrophy (i.e., tension, metabolic alterations, or
damage).
1254

Muscular Endurance
A muscular endurance training program has very short rest periods, often less
than 30 seconds. This restriction of the recovery time is purposeful; only a
minimal amount of rest is allowed when light loads are being lifted for many
repetitions. This type of program is designed to meet the guideline of the
specificity principle for muscular endurance (2). Short rest periods are
characteristic of circuit training programs (58) in which it is common to alternate
exercises and limit rest period lengths to 30 seconds or less.
1255

Conclusion
Well-designed programs are based on the application of sound principles during
each step of a process referred to as program design. The process begins with a
needs analysis to determine the specific demands of the sport and the training
status of the athlete. With this knowledge, appropriate exercises are selected,
and training frequency is established. The order of exercises in the workout is
considered next, followed by load assignments and training volume choices
based on desired training outcomes. Deciding on the length of the rest periods is
the last step leading to the design of a sport-specific resistance training
program. A composite view that includes all the program design variables (steps
1-7) for the three scenarios is shown in the scenario table.
Application of the Rest Period Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power and core  3 min exercises
Assistance exercises  60-90 s
Core exercises  2-3 minutes
Assistance exercises  60-90
seconds
Core exercises  30 s
Assistance exercises  20 sd
MONDAY
Push jerk  3 min
Front squat  3 min
Incline bench press  3 min
Triceps pushdown  60-90 sa
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3 min
Romanian deadlift  3 min
Seated row  3 min
Dumbbell  60-90 sa alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3 min
Rear leg–elevated  3 min split-squat
Pull-up  3 min
Single-leg stiff-  3 min legged
deadlift
LOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)
Deadlift  2-3 min
Back squat  2-3 min
Step-up  2-3 minb
Leg (knee) curl  60-90 s
Seated calf (heel)   60-90 s
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND
FRIDAY)
Bench press  2-3 min
Bent-over row  60-90 s
Shoulder press  2-3 min
Barbell biceps curl  60-90 s
Shoulder shrug  60-90 s
Lying triceps  60-90 s
extension
Abdominal crunch  20 sc
WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbell  30 s
deadlift
Vertical chest press  30 s
One-arm dumbbell  30 s
row
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  30 s
Lateral shoulder  30 s
raise
Single-leg stiff-  30 s
legged deadlift
Toe raise   30 s
(dorsiflexion)
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
1256

Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
COMMENTS
aDespite following a strength/power
training program, the athlete is
performing sets of 8 reps in this
exercise, a volume assignment for
hypertrophy training. Therefore, the
length of the rest period should be 60-
90 s. The rest period for the single-
joint exercises is slightly shorter
because fewer muscles are involved.
COMMENTS
bThis exercise is classified as an
assistance exercise and, like the
others, could be assigned a 60-
90 s rest period. Despite this,
the step-up is a unilateral
exercise that requires more time
for completion of each set.
Therefore, a longer rest period is
provided.
cAlthough this athlete is training
for hypertrophy, he is performing
sets of 20 reps in this exercise, a
volume assignment for muscular
endurance. Therefore, the length
of the rest period should be ≤30
s.
COMMENTS
dDespite the short rest
periods used during a
muscular endurance phase,
shorter rest periods can be
used for assistance exercises
due to a decreased
neuromuscular demand
compared to core exercises.
Application of All Program Design Variables: Steps
1-7
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
MONDAY (HEAVY PUSH
DAY)
Push jerka 3 × 3 @ 90 lb (41
kg)
Front squata 3 × 4 @ 155 lb
(70 kg)
Incline bench pressa 3 × 4 @
85 lb (39 kg)
Triceps pushdownb 3 × 8 @ 40
lb (18 kg)
WEDNESDAY (HEAVY PULL
DAY)
Hang power cleana 3 × 3 @ 95
lb (43 kg)
Romanian deadlifta 3 × 4 @
155 lb (70 kg)
LOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)d
Deadlifta 3 × 10 @ 345 lb (156 kg)
Back squata 3 × 10 @ 355 lb (161 kg)
Step-upa 3 × 10 @ 190 lb (86 kg)
Leg (knee) curlb 3 × 10 @ 175 lb (79 kg)
Seated calf (heel) raiseb 3 × 10 @ 145 lb (66
kg)
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND FRIDAY)d
Bench pressa 3 × 10 @ 225 lb (102 kg)
Bent-over rowa 3 × 10 @ 205 lb (93 kg)
Shoulder pressa 3 × 10 @ 135 lb (61 kg)
Barbell biceps curlb 3 × 10 @ 105 lb (48 kg)
Shoulder shrugb 3 × 10 @ 375 lb (170 kg)
Lying triceps extensionb 3 × 10 @ 110 lb (50
kg)
WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbell
deadlifte 3 × 12 @ 90 lb
(41 kg)
Vertical chest presse 3
× 12 @ 55 lb (25 kg)
One-arm dumbbell rowe
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 45 lb (20 kg)
SATURDAY
Lungee 3 × 12 @ 65 lb
(29 kg)
Lateral shoulder raisef 3
× 12 @ 10 lb (5 kg)
1257

Seated rowa 3 × 4 @ 120 lb
(54 kg)
Dumbbell alternating curlb 3 ×
8 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
FRIDAY (LIGHT MIX DAY)
Jump shruga 3 × 3 @ 35 lb
(16 kg)c
Rear leg–elevated split-squata
3 × 4 @ 75 lb (34 kg)
Pull-upa 3 × 4 @ body weight
Single-leg stiff-legged deadlift
3 × 4 @ 35 lb (16 kg)a
Abdominal crunche 3 × 20
Single-leg stiff-legged
deadlifte 3 × 12 10 lb (5
kg)
Toe raise (dorsiflexion)f
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 40 lb (18 kg)
COMMENTS
a3 min rest period
b60-90 s rest period
cLoad based on approximately
30% of the hang power clean
estimated 1RM
COMMENTS
d80%-85% of the loads used on Monday and
Tuesday should be prescribed for the training
sessions on Thursday and Friday, respectively
e30 s rest period
COMMENTS
f20 second rest period
KEY TERMS
1-repetition maximum (1RM)
2-for-2 rule
agonist
antagonist
assistance exercise
circuit training
compound set
core exercise
exercise history
exercise order
exercise selection
exercise technique experience
goal repetitions
individualization
injury analysis
intensity
inter-set rest
load
mechanical work
microdosing
movement analysis
1258

multijoint exercise
multiple-RM (xRM)
muscle balance
needs analysis
overload
physiological analysis
power exercise
profile
program design
progression
rating of perceived exertion (RPE)
repetition maximum (RM)
repetition-volume
repetitions
repetitions in reserve (RIR)
rest period
reversibility
SAID
set
set-repetition best (SRB)
single-joint exercise
specificity
split routine
structural exercise
superset
training background
training frequency
training status
variation
velocity
volume
volume–load
volume–load displacement
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  A basketball coach informs you that one of her athletes needs to increase
her vertical jump performance. In addition to some ballistic and plyometric
training, which of the following resistance training exercises are most likely
to enhance the athlete’s vertical jump performance?
1259
