CHAPTER 19
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR
PLYOMETRIC TRAINING
Chris A. Bailey, PhD, and Clive Brewer, MSc
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of David H. Potach
and Donald A. Chu to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the physiology of plyometric exercise;
identify the phases of the stretch-shortening cycle;
identify the components of a plyometric training program;
design a safe and effective plyometric training program;
prescribe effective plyometric exercise progressions and
regressions for a variety of individuals;
recommend proper equipment for use during plyometric
exercise; and
teach correct execution of lower and upper body plyometric
exercises.
Plyometric exercise refers to those activities that enable a muscle
to reach maximal force in the shortest possible time. Plyometric is a
1260

combination of Greek words that literally means to increase
measurement (plio = more; metric = measure) (67). Practically
defined, plyometric exercise is a quick, powerful movement using a
prestretch, or countermovement, that involves the stretch-
shortening cycle (SSC) (64). Furthermore, plyometric exercises are
typically classified as being either ballistic or rebounding. Ballistic
exercises are those that minimally include contributions from the
neuromuscular component of the SSC (e.g., squat jump, medicine
ball overhead throw). In contrast, rebound exercises are those
that require physiomechanical SSC contributions (e.g., drop jumps or
repeat countermovement jumps). This classification is important
because it determines the specific neuromuscular and mechanical
demands of each exercise (37). The purpose of plyometric exercise
is to increase the power of subsequent movements by using both
the natural elastic components of muscle and tendon and the stretch
reflex. To effectively use plyometrics as part of a training program, it
is important to understand the mechanics and physiology of
plyometric exercise, the principles of plyometric training program
design, and the methods of safely and effectively performing specific
plyometric exercises.
1261

Plyometric Mechanics and Physiology
Functional movements and athletic success depend on both the
proper function of all active muscles and the velocity at which these
muscular forces are used. The term used to define this force–velocity
relationship is power. When properly implemented, plyometric
training consistently improves an athlete’s ability to produce muscle
force and power (34, 59). This enhancement affects the impulse an
athlete can generate. Impulse, defined as the integral of force over
time, directly influences an athlete’s performance by changing
momentum. Specifically, an increased impulse leads to greater
momentum, which allows athletes to accelerate and decelerate more
effectively. These rapid changes in velocity are crucial performance
qualities across a wide range of sports. These increases are best
explained 
by 
two 
proposed 
models: 
mechanical 
and
neurophysiological (64).
Mechanical Model of Plyometric Exercise
In the mechanical model, elastic energy in the musculotendinous
components is increased with a rapid stretch and then stored (3, 16,
35). When this movement is immediately followed by a concentric
muscle action, the stored elastic energy is released, increasing the
total force production (3, 16, 35). Of the mechanical model’s many
elements, it is the series elastic component (SEC) that is the
workhorse of plyometric exercise. While the SEC includes some
muscular components, it is the tendons that constitute the majority
of the SEC. When the musculotendinous unit is stretched, as in an
eccentric muscle action, the SEC acts as a spring and is lengthened;
as it lengthens, elastic energy is stored and released with
subsequent concentric actions. Figure 19.1 provides a schematic
illustration of the components of the SSC.
1262

FIGURE 19.1 Mechanical model of skeletal muscle function. The series elastic component
(SEC), when stretched, stores elastic energy that increases the force produced. The
contractile component (CC) (i.e., actin, myosin, and crossbridges) is the primary source of
muscle force during concentric muscle action. The parallel elastic component (PEC) (i.e.,
epimysium, perimysium, endomysium, and sarcolemma) exerts a passive force with
unstimulated muscle stretch.
Adapted from Albert (1995).
Neurophysiological Model of Plyometric
Exercise
The neurophysiological model involves the potentiation (change in
the force–velocity characteristics of the muscle’s contractile
components caused by stretch [25]) of the concentric muscle action
by use of the stretch reflex (9-12). The stretch reflex is the body’s
involuntary response to an external stimulus that stretches the
muscles (31, 49). This reflexive component of plyometric exercise is
primarily composed of muscle spindle activity. Muscle spindles are
proprioceptive organs that are sensitive to the rate and magnitude of
a stretch; when a quick stretch is detected, muscular activity
reflexively increases (31, 49). During plyometric exercises, the
muscle spindles are stimulated by a rapid stretch, causing a reflexive
muscle action. The series elastic component (SEC) and parallel
elastic component (PEC) are two elastic structures that can be
stretched within the muscle during plyometric exercises. The SEC
includes tendons and muscle fiber crossbridges. The PEC contains
1263

collagenous structures (e.g., fascicular membranes), which provide
stability and protection to musculature. This reflexive response
potentiates, or increases, the activity in the agonist muscle, thereby
increasing the force the muscle produces (9-12, 41). As in the
mechanical model, if a concentric muscle action does not
immediately follow a stretch (i.e., if there is too long a time between
stretch and concentric action or movement over too large a range),
the potentiating ability of the stretch reflex is negated.
Enhancements in measurement techniques using force platforms
(kinetic 
data), 
motion 
capture 
(kinematic 
data), 
and
electromyography (motor unit activation) have demonstrated that
the mechanical and neurophysiological models contribute to the
increased production of force seen during plyometric exercise (3, 9-
12, 16, 35, 41). For example, Jarvis and colleagues (37) have
reported that rebound activities elicit enhanced neurophysiological
contributions when compared to ballistic activities and that increased
mechanical outputs exhibited during high-impact plyometrics are
largely the result of mechanical factors associated with potential
energy production (i.e., mechanical contributions).
Stretch-Shortening Cycle
The stretch-shortening cycle (SSC) employs the energy storage
capabilities of the SEC and stimulation of the stretch reflex to
facilitate a maximal increase in muscle recruitment over a minimal
amount of time. The SSC involves three distinct phases as shown in
table 19.1. While the table delineates the SSC’s individual mechanical
and neurophysiological events during each phase, it is important to
remember that all the events listed do not necessarily occur within
the given phase. That is, some of the events may last longer or may
require less time than allowed in the given phase. Phase I is the
eccentric phase, which is the time from resting position to the
bottom of the countermovement that involves preloading the agonist
muscle group or groups. During this phase, the SEC stores elastic
energy, and the muscle spindles are stimulated. As the muscle
1264

spindles are stretched, they send a signal to the ventral root of the
spinal cord via the type Ia afferent nerve fibers.
TABLE 19.1 Stretch-Shortening Cycle
Phase
Action
Physiological event
I—Eccentric
Stretch of the agonist
muscle
Elastic energy is stored in the series elastic
component.
Muscle spindles are stimulated.
II—
Amortization
Pause between phases I
and III
Type Ia afferent nerves synapse with alpha
motor neurons.
Alpha motor neurons transmit signals to
agonist muscle group.
III—
Concentric
Shortening of agonist
muscle fibers
Elastic energy is released from the series
elastic component.
Alpha motor neurons stimulate the agonist
muscle group.
To visualize the eccentric phase, consider a countermovement
vertical jump. Stretch reflex latency (the time from reflex
stimulation to the beginning of agonist muscle activity) largely
depends on nerve conduction velocities and therefore increases with
greater distances from the spinal cord (i.e., longer nerves) (40, 42,
44, 54). Quadriceps and gastrocnemius stretch reflexes typically
range from 20 to 30 milliseconds and from 30 to 45 milliseconds,
respectively (40, 53).
Phase II is the time between the eccentric and concentric phases
and is termed the amortization (or coupling) phase. This is the
time from the end of the eccentric phase to the initiation of the
concentric muscle action. There is a delay between the eccentric and
concentric muscle actions during which type Ia afferent nerves
synapse with the alpha motor neurons in the ventral root of the
spinal cord. The alpha motor neurons then transmit signals to the
agonist muscle group. This phase of the SSC is perhaps the most
crucial in allowing greater power production; its duration must be
kept short. If the amortization phase lasts too long, the energy
1265

stored during the eccentric phase dissipates as heat, and the stretch
reflex will not increase muscle activity during the upcoming
concentric phase (14). Research has shown that increasing time in
the amortization phase results in increases in elastic energy lost in
the bench press compared to no delay between eccentric and
concentric phases (energy losses were 0.35 s = 25%, 0.9 s = 52%,
1 s = 55%, and 1.5 s = 70%) (66). Consider the countermovement
vertical jump mentioned earlier. Once the countermovement has
stopped, the amortization phase has begun. As soon as movement
begins again, the amortization phase has ended.
The concentric phase, phase III, is the body’s response to the
eccentric and amortization phases. In this phase, the energy stored
in the SEC during the eccentric phase either is used to increase the
force of the subsequent movement or is dissipated as heat. This
stored elastic energy increases the force produced during the
concentric phase movement beyond that of an isolated concentric
muscle action (15, 58). In addition, the alpha motor neurons
stimulate the agonist muscle group, resulting in a reflexive
concentric muscle action (i.e., the stretch reflex). The efficiency of
these subsystems is essential to the proper performance of
plyometric exercises. Again, visualize the vertical jump. As soon as
movement begins in an upward direction, the amortization phase
has ended, and the concentric phase of the SSC has begun. In this
example, one of the agonist muscles is the quadriceps (rectus
femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius). During
the countermovement, the quadriceps undergoes a rapid stretch
(eccentric phase); there is a delay in movement (amortization
phase), and then the muscle concentrically extends the knee,
allowing the athlete to push off the ground (concentric phase).
The rate of musculotendinous stretch is vital to plyometric
exercise (41). This can be influenced by the type of plyometric
activity and the ground contact technique (13). A high stretch rate
results in greater muscle recruitment and activity during the SSC
concentric phase. The importance of the stretch rate may be
1266

illustrated by three different vertical jump tests: a static squat jump,
a countermovement jump, and an approach jump with several steps.
As the rate of stretch increases, an athlete’s absolute performance in
these tests improves; the static squat jump results in the lowest
jump height, and the approach jump results in the highest. The
static squat jump requires the athlete to get into a squatting position
(i.e., 90-degree hip flexion and 90-degree knee flexion) followed by
a jump up. This jump does not use stored elastic energy and is too
slow to allow potentiation from the stretch reflex because there is
essentially no eccentric phase. The countermovement jump uses a
rapid eccentric element (i.e., a partial squat) followed immediately
by rapid concentric muscle activity (i.e., a jump up). The rapid
eccentric phase allows the athlete to store and use elastic energy in
the stretched musculotendinous unit and stimulates the stretch
reflex, thereby potentiating muscle activity (7, 33). The approach
(one- or two-step) jump uses an even quicker, more forceful
eccentric phase than the countermovement jump; the increased rate
of stretch during the eccentric phase allows a further increase in
vertical jump height (4, 6, 8, 29).
The type of ground contact (and, hence, the rate of stretch and
duration of the amortization phase, which affects the return of
elastic energy) is influenced by the technique used during rebound
actions. Cappa and Behm (13) demonstrated that flat-foot landing
techniques resulted in significantly longer ground contact times in
comparison to active forefoot landings (which also had a 45%
greater rate of force production) due to the increased contribution of
neuromuscular 
and 
elastic 
force 
production. 
Strength 
and
conditioning professionals should note that technique is therefore an
essential factor in the effectiveness of the SSC, rate of force
development, and subsequent kinematic variables of the movement.
Strength and conditioning professionals may consider
that the duration of the amortization phase may lead to
activities 
that 
promote 
different 
movement
1267

characteristics. To this end, Schmidtbleicher (56)
categorized plyometric activities as either slow SSC
(>0.25 s) or fast SSC (<0.25 s), depending on their
ground contact time.
As well as enhancing nonvoluntary neuromuscular outputs, the
SSC serves a protective function within the myotendinous structures
of the musculoskeletal system. The Golgi tendon organ is
encapsulated within the serial components of the myotendinous
junction. This is a proprioceptive mechanism that detects the rate
and magnitude of force being applied to the respective tendon and
will cause an inverse stretch reflex to occur past a tensile threshold,
which immediately inhibits the excitatory signal through the motor
neuron to the motor unit. Progressive plyometric training serves to
desensitize the Golgi tendon organ, thus increasing the excitability
potential of the motor unit for increased performance gains.
The SSC combines mechanical and neurophysiological
mechanisms and is the basis of plyometric exercise. A
rapid eccentric muscle action stimulates the stretch
reflex and storage of elastic energy, which results in an
increase in the force produced during the subsequent
concentric action.
1268

Program Design
Plyometric exercise prescription is similar to resistance and aerobic
exercise prescriptions—mode, intensity, frequency, duration, volume,
density, technique development and progression, and a warm-up
period must all be dynamic variables incorporated in the design of a
sound plyometric training program. Unfortunately, there is minimal
research demarcating optimal program variables for the design of
plyometric 
exercise 
programs. 
Therefore, 
when 
prescribing
plyometric exercise, strength and conditioning professionals must
rely on the available research, practical experience, and the
increasing availability of motion capture and force plate technology
to guide decision making.
Needs Analysis
To properly design a plyometric training program, the strength and
conditioning professional must analyze the needs of the athlete by
evaluating his or her sport, sport position, anthropometry, and
training status. Each sport and position has its own unique
requirements; some requirements are unique because of the
movements involved, while others have distinctive injury profiles and
risks. The anthropometry of the athlete is important, because
heavier athletes face exponentially higher loads in gravity-assisted
exercises than athletes with a lower mass; therefore, athletes’ body
weight and their strength relative to their body weight become
important considerations. Further, each athlete possesses a unique
training status; some may be new to training and have never
performed plyometric exercises, while others may have been injured.
Each of these populations of athletes requires a different approach
to plyometric training. By understanding each sport’s individual
requirements, the positions within the sport, and the needs of each
athlete, the strength and conditioning professional is better able to
design a safe, effective plyometric training program.
1269

Mode
The mode of plyometric training is determined by the body region
performing the given exercise. For example, a single-leg hop is a
lower body rebounding plyometric exercise, while a two-hand
kneeling medicine ball throw is an upper body exercise that is
performed ballistically. Modes of plyometric exercise are discussed in
the paragraphs that follow.
Lower Body Plyometrics
Lower body plyometrics are appropriate for virtually any athlete and
any sport or rehabilitation context. Because most sports require
athletes to produce a maximal amount of muscular force in a short
amount of time, lower body plyometrics provide an ideal and highly
variable training stimulus that positively transfers training benefits to
a variety of sports. For example, sprinters require sagittal plane
movements, whereas most other sports require combinations of
sagittal plane, frontal plane, and occasional transverse plane
movements to be successful in competition. Demand can differ
within positions in each sport: A middle blocker in volleyball may
require predominantly lateral and vertical movements, whereas an
outside hitter may have an increased emphasis on horizontal into
vertical movements. American football, baseball, soccer, and
basketball athletes must make quick, powerful movements and
changes of direction in all planes to compete successfully. A
basketball center is an example of an athlete who would benefit
greatly from a plyometric training program, because the center is
required to jump repeatedly for rebounds. To be successful, the
center must be able to out-jump the opposing center in order to
rebound more loose balls. Conversely, center backs in soccer may
benefit from more ballistic actions, because they will typically
accelerate into a jump from a running start into a single-foot takeoff.
Lower body plyometric training also gives the ability to produce
more force in a shorter amount of time, thereby allowing a higher
jump. This should also guide the strength and conditioning
1270

professional to consider that plyometric session design is not limited
to actions purely in the sagittal plane, and the transition from one
foot to two feet, two feet to one foot, one foot to the other, or one
leg to the same leg are often as important for performance
enhancement as two-footed actions.
Aerobic endurance athletes can also benefit from participation in a
plyometric training program, because repetitive efforts that have
neurophysiological and mechanical properties to optimize movement
efficiency improve running and cycling economy by allowing muscles
to produce more force with less energy.
The various lower body plyometric drills have differing intensity
levels and directional movements. The types of lower body
plyometric drills include singular and repetitive actions (e.g.,
bounds) using one foot (hop) or both feet (jump), which may be
transitional, in-place, or involve objects such as a box (e.g., a box
jump) or hurdle. See table 19.2 for a description of these drills.
TABLE 19.2 Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Type
Description
Hops
Takeoff from one foot and landing on the same foot. Volume is either
measured by distance traveled or number of foot contacts. This movement
develops acceleration and deceleration capabilities in a single limb, with
intensity defined by displacement velocity and volume defined by foot
contacts. These drills may be singular (ballistic hop) that is in place or
horizontal, or reactive (multiple repetitive actions for height or distance).
Bounds
Takeoff from one foot and landing, or transitioning through, to the other foot.
Depending on the training status of the athlete (rehab vs. performance), these
drills may be singular (ballistic bound) or reactive (multiple repetitive actions
with alternating ground contact). Bounds may result in greater horizontal
velocity than hops and jumps and therefore are ideal for developing
accelerations and decelerations with bilateral weight transfer. Intensity is
defined by the horizontal velocity of the action. Volume is typically measured
by distance but may be through the number of repetitions performed.
Jumps
Takeoff and landing with two feet that may be horizontal or vertical in nature.
The height or length of a jump determines the intensity of the action. Volume
is determined by the number of foot contacts. Jumps may be in place, have
1271

Type
Description
multiple repetitive actions, involve equipment such as boxes or hurdles, or
consist of a combination of these attributes.
Depth
jumps
and
depth
hops
Depth jumps and hops (“shock” actions) use gravity and the athlete’s weight
to increase exercise intensity. The athlete assumes a position on a box, steps
off, lands, and immediately transitions vertically, horizontally, laterally, or to
another box. The height of the box determines the intensity of the action, and
the volume is determined by the number of foot contacts. Repetitive jumps
onto boxes or over barriers may be added in sequence.
Upper Body Plyometrics
Rapid, powerful upper body movements are requisites for several
sports and activities, including baseball, softball, tennis, golf, and
throws in track and field (i.e., the shot put, discus, and javelin). For
example, an elite baseball pitcher routinely throws a baseball at 80
to 100 miles per hour (129-161 km/h). It is important to understand
that to reach velocities of this magnitude, throwing actions have to
be initiated with the legs and require hip–shoulder separation and
high rotational velocities in the hip and thoracic spine (e.g., a
baseball pitcher’s shoulder joint must move at more than 6,000
degrees per s) (23, 26, 27, 53). Plyometric training of the shoulder
joint may not only increase pitching velocity, but it also may prevent
injury to the shoulder and elbow joints. Such upper body actions
need to be linked with impulses generated through segmental
actions initiated in the lower body if they are to be effective in the
transfer to performance.
Plyometric drills for the upper body are not used as often as those
for the lower body and have been studied less extensively, but they
are nonetheless essential to athletes who require upper body power
(52). Plyometrics for the upper body (e.g., throws and slams) are
typically ballistic in nature (table 19.3).
TABLE 19.3 Upper Body Plyometric Drills
Type
Description
1272

Type
Description
Throws
Single or both arms projecting a medicine ball or other external weight either
horizontally or vertically. Progressions include increased mass of the implement,
increased target distance, or change of emphasis in complexity of the movement
(e.g., kneeling vs. standing throw).
Slams
Generally, a double-arm movement forcefully bringing a medicine ball or other
implement directly down to the ground. Progressions include increased mass of
the medicine ball or increased target velocity of the medicine ball.
Pull
Ballistically pulling the body in a vertical direction such as an explosive supine
row or a pull-up. The position of the center of mass and range of action will be
determined by the athlete’s strength and movement competence.
Push
Pressing the body away from the ground in a prone position. Progressions need
to consider the athlete’s relative strength levels and include incorporating shock
methodology with varying depth of drop-to-ground contact, decreasing flight
time to increase movement velocity, or increasing complexity through lateral or
overhead movements.
Note: Although these are classified as upper body movements, some throws and slams are
total body in nature. If the upper body is not isolated, many actions are initiated with the
hips, knees, and ankles and a postural force-multiplication enables the object to be
projected from the upper body. This is entirely appropriate if this is a desired objective
within the athlete’s program.
Trunk Plyometrics
In general, it is difficult to perform true plyometric drills that directly
target trunk musculature (table 19.4) because all the requisite
plyometric elements may not be present. As with upper body
plyometric exercises, after the eccentric phase of the SSC there is
likely some storage of elastic energy during a plyometric (so to
speak) trunk drill.
TABLE 19.4 Trunk Plyometric Drills
Type
Description
Lower body
anchored
Either suspended in a prone position or in a traditional sit-up position with
the feet anchored so that the upper body is free to move. Movements can
be progressed by incorporating or increasing an external resistance or
movement velocity.
1273

Type
Description
Upper body
anchored
Lying supine, holding a fixed object or a partner’s legs, while the lower body
is free to move. Movements can be progressed by incorporating or
increasing external resistance, movement velocity, or plane of motion (e.g.,
increased transverse plane involvement is more complex than sagittal plane
only).
Throws
Forcefully projecting a medicine ball or other external weight in a specified
direction. The mass of the implement will influence the resultant movement
velocity and should be considered in respect to the mass–velocity–
momentum equation and the force production capability of the athlete.
Exercises for the trunk may be performed ballistically provided
that movement modifications are made. Specifically, the exercise
movement must be shorter and quicker to allow stimulation and use
of the stretch reflex. The relatively large range of motion and the
time needed to complete the movement do not permit reflexive
potentiation of the abdominal muscles. The exercises can be
modified to decrease both the range of motion and time, thereby
allowing the agonist muscles to be potentiated.
Intensity
Plyometric intensity refers to the stress placed on muscles,
connective tissues, and joints during an exercise. It is primarily
determined by the type of drill performed, technique used, and
arrangement of equipment. Additionally, it is important to consider
the complexity of the movement when assessing intensity. For
example, multiple hurdle hops in a straight line can involve higher
linear speeds at a relatively lower intensity. However, if the same
hurdles are arranged in a square that requires the athlete to change
direction with each hop, the intensity will be significantly higher. This
increase in intensity occurs because athletes must decelerate their
momentum before each direction change. They must then use the
plyometric response to propel themselves in a new direction. As a
result, both the intensity of the drill and the ground contact time can
increase substantially when directional changes are incorporated.
1274

The intensity of plyometric drills is, therefore, multifactorial and
should be considered on a continuum from low to high intensity
depending on a number of planning factors. For example, skips are
considered a relatively low-intensity drill, while depth jumps are
considered a higher intensity drill because they place a higher stress
on the muscles and joints (figure 19.2).
FIGURE 19.2 Continuum of plyometric exercises.
In addition to the type of drill, several other factors also affect
plyometric intensity (table 19.5). Generally, as intensity increases,
volume should decrease (57). Because the intensity of plyometric
exercise can vary significantly, careful consideration must be given to
choosing proper drills during a specific training cycle.
TABLE 19.5 Factors Affecting the Prescribed
Intensity of Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Factor
Effect
Points of
contact
The ground reaction force during single-leg lower body plyometric drills
places more stress on an extremity’s muscles, connective tissues, and
joints than during double-leg plyometric drills.
Speed
Greater horizontal velocity increases the intensity of the drill.
Technique
Ankle, knee, and hip stiffness and the ability to maintain postural
alignment influence ground contact time, ground reactional forces,
eccentric muscle actions, and injury risk.
Strength
Higher levels of strength–to–body weight reduce the relative intensity of
a drill where mass is accelerated toward the ground by gravity (i.e., any
1275

Factor
Effect
form of reactive plyometric drill).
Directional
change
Changing direction requires deceleration and redirected acceleration of
the athlete’s center of mass. This increases the impulse required in the
action and typically requires increased ground contact time.
Vertical
component of
the drill
The higher the body’s center of gravity, the greater the force on landing.
Mass
The greater the athlete’s body weight, the more stress is placed on
muscles, connective tissues, and joints. External load in the form of
bars, weight vests, ankle weights, and wrist weights can be added to
the body to increase a drill’s intensity.
Much like exercise selection for resistance training, specific
consideration should be given to the muscle actions that are
incorporated into each plyometric exercise because this will alter the
muscle activation and resulting intensity. Reactive exercises require
athletes to reduce forces in a landing impact prior to propelling
themselves in the desired direction, while ballistic exercises may not
(37). For example, a single countermovement jump does not require
an athlete to absorb the same force as a depth jump. This realization
is important, because research indicates that muscle activation,
power, and relative impulse are all higher in rebound exercises
compared to ballistic exercises, which demonstrates an increased
level of intensity (37).
When considering exercise intensity, it is important to take note of
the exercise intensity overall as well as at the joint level. Research
has shown that intensity is joint specific when considering the hips,
knees, and ankles of several exercises (61). For example, the
intensity of a backward jump is higher at the hips and ankles than it
is at the knees. Exercise modifications based on the joint
considerations of an athlete are not uncommon, and considering the
intensity applied at each joint that is involved in an exercise will
likely result in more effective programming and adaptation.
1276

Frequency
Frequency refers to the number of plyometric training sessions per
week, typically ranging from one to four. This frequency depends on
the athletes’ sport, their experience with plyometric training, their
overall training status, the volume and intensity of plyometrics within
the broader resistance training program, and the time of year (e.g.,
off-season or in-season). For example, during the season, one
session per week is appropriate for American football players, while
two or three sessions per week are common for track and field
athletes (2). During the off-season, plyometric training frequency
may increase to two or three sessions per week for American
football players and to three or four sessions per week for track and
field athletes (2).
As with other program variables, research on the optimal
frequency for plyometric training is limited. Because the literature is
sparse, strength and conditioning professionals often rely on
practical experience when determining the frequency with which
athletes train using plyometric exercise. Rather than concentrating
on the frequency, many authors suggest relying more on the
recovery time between plyometric training sessions (19). Forty-eight
to 72 hours between plyometric sessions is a typical recovery time
guideline for prescribing plyometrics (19); using these typical
recovery times, athletes commonly perform two to three plyometric
sessions per week. As with resistance training, recovery between
workouts must be adequate to prevent overtraining (depending on
the sport, training status, and training intensity). Furthermore,
moderate to high volumes for a given body area should not be
performed on successive days (51).
Recovery
Because plyometric drills involve maximal efforts to improve power,
they are typically fatigue inducing and require complete and
adequate recovery (i.e., sufficient time between repetitions, sets,
and workouts) (51). Recovery for depth jumps may consist of 5 to
1277

10 seconds of rest between repetitions and 2 to 5 minutes between
sets. The time between sets is determined by a proper work-to-rest
ratio (i.e., 1:5 to 1:10) and is specific to the volume and type of drill
being performed. Drills should not be thought of as aerobic
endurance training but as power training. Plyometric training can
induce fatigue and inflammatory responses that can significantly
increase delayed onset of muscular soreness and may impair
jumping performance for up to 72 hours after a session. While these
effects are noticeable in power-related measurements, strength
levels may remain unchanged (5, 18, 60). Given this prolonged
recovery period, strength and conditioning professionals should
carefully schedule plyometric sessions to allow adequate recovery
time between workouts and before competitions. This approach
helps ensure optimal performance and reduces the risk of
overtraining or injury.
Volume
Plyometric volume is typically expressed as the number of repetitions
and sets performed during a given training session (table 19.6).
Lower body plyometric volume is normally given as the number of
foot contacts (each time a foot, or the feet together, contact the
surface) per workout (2, 19) but may also be expressed as distance,
as with plyometric bounding. For example, an athlete beginning a
plyometric training program may start with a bound for 30 yards (or
meters) per repetition but may progress to 100 yards (or meters)
per repetition for the same drill. Recommended lower body
plyometric volumes vary for athletes of different levels of experience
and also with the intensity level of the prescribed exercise. Upper
body plyometric volume is typically expressed as the number of
throws or catches per workout, and the ballistic nature of these
actions typically makes the training volumes reflect those of upper
body resistance exercises (i.e., 3-5 sets of 3-5 repetitions).
TABLE 19.6   Plyometric Volumes
1278

Plyometric experience level
Intensity level of the plyometric drill
Low
Moderate
High
Beginner (no experience)
80 to 100
Nr to 40
Nr
Intermediate (some experience)
100 to 120
20 to 100
Nr to 20
Advanced (considerable experience)
120 to 200
20 to 120
20 to 40
Note: Volume is given in contacts per session. Nr = not recommended.
Progression
Plyometrics is a form of resistance training and thus must follow the
principles of progressive overload, which is the systematic
increase in training frequency, volume, and intensity in various
combinations. In simplistic models, as intensity increases, volume
decreases. This relationship, however, is variable depending on the
athlete’s training status and the nature of the activity prescribed. For
example, athlete A who has minimal plyometric experience and a
low training status may do 3 sets of 10 repetitions of the pogo jump
to specifically train the SSC in the gastrocnemius–soleus complex,
but athlete B, who has a higher training age, may do the same drill
with an emphasis on minimizing ground contact time, and elite
athlete C may do the drill at the end of a warm-up to simply
potentiate the neuromuscular system. Further, after the pogo jump,
athlete A may do jumps over short hurdles, but athlete B may do the
depth jump instead and perform 2 sets of 4 repetitions with a 24-
inch (61 cm) box. Elite athlete C may also do the depth jump but at
a higher volume and intensity, such as 4 sets of 8 repetitions using a
45-inch (114 cm) box.
Other factors such as the athlete’s sport, sport season, and
training phase can influence the plyometric training schedule, design
of a plyometric training session, and the method of progressive
overload. An off-season plyometric program for American football,
for example, may be performed twice a week, but freshmen versus
senior players will do different plyometric activities. Additionally, the
plyometric programs performed by skill (position) players versus
1279

offensive or defensive line players may be different. Thus, careful
consideration should be given to each athlete’s capacity and training
status when progressing a plyometric program, because volume and
intensity are not always directly related.
Effective 
plyometric 
programs 
include 
the 
same
variables that are essential to any training program
design: mode, intensity, frequency, recovery, volume,
and progression.
1280

Program Length
Research has yet to determine an optimal plyometric training
program length. Currently, most programs range from 6 to 10 weeks
(2, 34); however, vertical jump height improves as quickly as four
weeks after the start of a plyometric training program (54). In
general, plyometric training should be prescribed similarly to
resistance training within a periodized plan. For those sports
requiring quick, powerful movements, it is beneficial to perform
plyometric exercises throughout the training cycle. The intensity and
volume of the selected drills should vary with the training status of
the athlete and the sport season.
1281

Warm-Up
As in any training program, a plyometric exercise session should
begin with a specific warm-up that incorporates activation,
mobilization, 
and 
potentiation 
of 
the 
neuromuscular 
and
musculoskeletal system (refer to chapter 15 for movement
preparation guidelines). The specific warm-up for plyometric training
should consist of low-intensity, dynamic movements that increase in
intensity as the warm-up progresses. Table 19.7 provides a list and
explanation of examples of specific warm-up drills for plyometric
training.
Steps for Implementing a Plyometric
Training Program
1. Evaluate the athlete, including the athlete’s sport and training history.
2. Establish sport-, position-, and athlete-specific goals.
3. Teach the athlete proper jumping, landing, and throwing technique.
4. Assign proper plyometric training program design variables, addressing
intensity, frequency, recovery, and volume.
5. Properly progress the plyometric training program.
1282

Age Considerations
It is becoming more common for younger and older individuals to
want to augment the training programs for their sport with
plyometric exercise. When these exercises are applied appropriately,
these populations can experience the same positive outcomes as
other age groups, with minimal risk of injury, with appropriate
consideration of prescription to technical competence and strength
levels.
Adolescents
Although plyometrics commonly have been viewed as appropriate
only for conditioning elite adult athletes, prepubescent and
adolescent children may also benefit from training with plyometric
and 
plyometric-like 
exercises. 
Besides 
providing 
the 
well-
documented muscular power and bone strength adaptations, regular
participation in an appropriately designed plyometric training
program can better prepare young athletes for the demands of sport
practice and competition (20) by enhancing neuromuscular control
and performance. Research has yet to determine a universal age at
which people are physically able to begin participating in a
plyometric training program. An analysis of the body’s development
provides some insight into the issue. Because the epiphyseal plates
of the bones of prepubescent children have yet to close (39, 47),
depth jumps and other high-intensity lower body drills are
contraindicated (2, 36, 46). Further, and as with all forms of
exercise, boys and girls should have the emotional maturity to
accept and follow directions and should be able to appreciate the
benefits and concerns associated with this method of training.
Empirically, 7- and 8-year-olds have been trained in progressive
plyometric programs and without detriment to future sport
involvement (20).
TABLE 19.7 Examples of Plyometric Warm-Up Drills
1283

Drill type
Explanation
Marching
Mimics running movements
Emphasizes posture and movement technique
Reinforces proper lower body movements for running
Ground contact
Prepares the body for impact and high-intensity drills:
Rapid pogo jump—not allowing the heel to touch the ground
(emphasizes ankle dorsiflexion with active front foot ground
contact)
Straight-leg skip or bound—emphasizes negative foot speed
(the rapid backward acceleration of the foot) into the ground,
minimizes knee flexion, and maximizes hip extension to prepare
for the impact of plyometric drills
Exaggerated form of reciprocal upper and lower extremity
movements
Emphasizes quick takeoff and landing
Mimics plyometric activities
Footwork
Targets multiplanar acceleration and deceleration mechanics
Prepares for changes of direction during plyometric drills
Examples: shuttle, shuffle, pattern, and stride drills
Neuromuscular
acceleration and
deceleration
Multijoint explosive directional changes with full-range
movements:
Forward, side, and backward lunge (similar to the forward
[step] lunge exercise but multidirectional)
Squat patterns (e.g., a tall reach into a deep snap-down then a
squat jump to a standing landing)
Note: These examples are specific preparatory drills that can be incorporated into the
RAMP phases of a warm-up for plyometrics; see chapter 15 for more detail.
Plyometric exercise programs for children should be used to
develop the neuromuscular control and the anaerobic skills that will
carry over to safer participation in sport and athletics, both during
childhood and as they advance to higher levels of competition. For
example, several research studies cite the benefits of using proper
landing technique as a method of reducing an athlete’s risk of lower
extremity injury (see the Safety Considerations section starting on
page 576 for details).
1284

It is extremely important that plyometric exercise programs for
children gradually progress from relatively simple drills to more
complex drills. It is important to focus on the quality of the
movements (e.g., proper body alignment and speed of movement)
to develop techniques that will be essential for more advanced
exercises. The current evidence suggests that a twice-weekly
program for 8 to 10 weeks beginning at 50 to 60 jumps a session
and increasing exercise load weekly results in the largest changes in
running and jumping performance in young children (38). An
alternative program for children who do not have the capability or
tolerance for a twice- weekly program would be a low-intensity
program for a longer duration (38).
Under proper supervision and with an appropriate
program, prepubescent and adolescent children may
perform plyometric exercises. Depth jumps and high-
intensity lower body plyometrics are contraindicated for
this population.
Masters
Masters athletes find that they can maintain their physical
capabilities late into life and are looking for additional training
insights. When designing a plyometric training program for a
masters athlete, the strength and conditioning professional needs to
be specific in deciding on the goal of the program. Some primary
issues to consider are strength levels (i.e., ensuring that age-related
sarcopenia has not degraded muscle function) and any preexisting
orthopedic conditions (e.g., osteoarthritis or any sort of surgical joint
intervention) or joint degeneration. These call for even greater
caution and a more careful use of plyometric exercise. For example,
a healthy masters athlete without surgical history who wants to
improve his or her running performance should use depth jumps and
single-leg exercises cautiously, so alternate-leg bounding and the
double-leg hopping would be better choices. Similarly, a masters
1285

runner with a history of knee surgery such as partial meniscus
removal or with significant joint degeneration should regard depth
jumps and single-leg plyometric exercises as contraindicated and use
other forms of plyometrics cautiously.
After consideration of the predispositions related to the masters
athlete’s physical condition, a plyometric program should be
designed according to the same guidelines as outlined for adult
athletes, with the following emphases:
Intensity and volume should be carefully considered relative to
the performance capacities of the individual.
Cautions regarding decreased strength capacities, potential for
degenerative 
joint 
conditions, 
and 
decreased 
recovery
capacities associated with aging should be applied.
It is important to note how the masters athlete feels after
training; soreness may occur, but the program should be
modified if chronic or excessive pain or discomfort is present.
1286

Plyometrics and Other Forms of
Exercise
Plyometric exercise is only one part of an athlete’s overall training
program. Many sports and activities use multiple energy systems or
require other forms of exercise to properly prepare athletes for
competition. Each energy system and sport-specific need must be
included in a well-designed training program.
Plyometric Exercise and Resistance
Training
A combination of plyometrics and resistance training during a
training cycle should be structured to allow maximal efficiency and
physical improvement. The following list and table 19.8 provide
guidelines for developing a combined program:
Combine lower body resistance training with upper body
plyometrics, and upper body resistance training with lower
body plyometrics.
Performing heavy resistance training sessions and plyometric
sessions on the same day is not usually recommended (17,
24). However, many athletes may benefit from complex
training, a combination of resistance training and plyometric
training within the same training session to enhance fast and
slow force expression.
If athletes perform this type of training, adequate recovery is
needed between plyometrics and other high-intensity training.
Plyometrics can comprise a stand-alone training session or be
incorporated into a resistance training session. Incorporating
plyometrics into a resistance training session may have
neuromuscular 
recruitment 
benefits 
through 
facilitating
postactivation potentiation during biomechanically similar
movements (22).
1287

TABLE 19.8 Sample Schedule for Integrating
Resistance Training and Plyometrics
Day
Resistance
training session
Plyometric
session
Single session complex*
Monday
Low-intensity (light)
upper body
High-intensity
(reactive) lower
body
High-intensity (heavy) lower body
resistance training + Lower body
plyometrics
Tuesday
High-intensity
(heavy) lower body
Low-intensity upper
body
Low-intensity (light) upper body
resistance training + Upper body
plyometrics
Thursday High-intensity
(heavy) upper body
Low-intensity
(ballistic) lower
body
High-intensity (heavy) upper body
resistance training + Upper body
plyometrics
Friday
Low-intensity (light)
lower body
High-intensity upper
body
Low-intensity (light) lower body
resistance training + Lower body
plyometrics
*Emphasis on resistance training + plyometrics within a total body session.
The following are classifications and examples of complex training
based on Cormier and colleagues (22):
Contrast training involves alternating high-load exercises
and high-velocity exercises in contrast pairs in a set-by-set
fashion with sufficient inter-set rest to avoid fatigue-induced
interference. An example is an American football lineman
alternating sets of heavy bench presses with sets of clap push-
ups.
Ascending complex training involves sets of a high-velocity
exercise followed by sets of a contrasting high-force exercise.
An example is a weightlifter doing 2 sets of maximal-effort box
jumps before performing mid-thigh power cleans.
Descending sets require multiple high-force exercises to be
completed before the execution of high-velocity exercises. An
example is a thrower doing 3 sets of 2 repetitions of heavy
back squats followed by 3 sets of 4 repetitions of overhead
medicine ball throws.
1288

Plyometric Exercise and Aerobic Exercise
Many sports—such as basketball and soccer—have both an
anaerobic (i.e., power) and an aerobic component. Therefore,
multiple types of training must be combined to best prepare athletes
for these types of sports. Because aerobic exercise may have an
interfering effect on power production (17), it is advisable to perform
plyometric exercise before aerobic endurance training. The program
design variables do not change and should complement each other
to most effectively prepare these athletes for competition.
1289

Safety Considerations
Plyometric exercise is not inherently dangerous; however, as with all
modes of exercise, the risk of injury exists. Injuries can occur simply
due to an accident, but they more typically occur when proper
training procedures are violated and may be the result of an
insufficient strength and conditioning base, inadequate warm-up,
improper progression of lead-up drills, inappropriate volume or
intensity for the phase of training, poor shoes or surface, or a simple
lack of skill. The following sections identify and address these and
other risk factors. Knowledge of risk factors can improve the safety
of athletes performing plyometric exercise.
Pretraining Evaluation of the Athlete
To reduce the risk of injury and facilitate the performance of
plyometric exercises, the athlete must understand proper plyometric
technique and possess a sufficient base of strength, speed, and
balance. In addition, the athlete must be sufficiently mature, both
physically and psychologically, to participate in a plyometric training
program. The following evaluative items can help determine whether
an athlete meets these conditions.
Technique
Before adding any drill to an athlete’s plyometric program, the
strength and conditioning professional must first demonstrate proper
technique to the athlete and then coach and cue the athlete on
proper technique to maximize the drill’s effectiveness and minimize
the risk of injury. For lower body plyometrics, proper landing
technique is essential. If an athlete’s center of gravity is offset from
the base of support, performance is hindered, and injury may occur.
The shoulders should be over the knees and the knees should be
over the toes during the landing, which the athlete accomplishes
through ankle dorsiflexion and knee and hip flexion (figure 19.3). In
addition, when viewing the frontal plane and motion of the athlete
1290

performing lower body plyometrics, it is essential that the knees are
positioned over the toes. Inward movement of the knees—also
termed dynamic valgus—is a significant risk factor for knee
injuries of all types, including patellofemoral pain and tears or
ruptures of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) (45).
In addition to instructing an athlete on a proper body position
while landing, the strength and conditioning professional must
explain, coach, and cue the athlete to land with an active flat foot.
In preparation for ground contact, the athlete’s ankles should be
dorsiflexed (so that the toes are pulled back toward the knees). This
means that the bottom of the foot is parallel to the ground as the
athlete comes into landing. Immediately before landing, the athlete
should be taught to aggressively plantarflex the ankle to “attack the
ground with the foot.” This achieves two outcomes. First, the
plantarflexion increases the tension in the gastrocnemius–soleus
complex at ground contact, which increases the efficacy of the SSC
and enhances the output power in the resulting jump. Second, the
last-second adjustment in the angle of the foot, along with the
increased muscle tension, means that the heels stay off the ground
during the land–takeoff action. This enhances both anterior and
vertical propulsion and is often coached as “the credit card rule,”
meaning that enough of the foot should be in contact with the
ground to achieve high impulses, but the strength and conditioning
professional should be able to slide a credit card under the athlete’s
heels (12a).
Strength
Consideration of the athlete’s level of strength is necessary before he
or she performs plyometrics. Strength is essential for the
maintenance of posture through the plyometric action and the ability
to manage and appropriately direct ground reaction forces through
effective ground contact to optimize performance benefits and
reduce potential for injury (figure 19.4). Without these outcomes,
safe and effective techniques cannot be maintained as the intensity
1291

of plyometric exercise is increased. Previous recommendations for
lower body plyometrics stated that the athlete’s 1RM squat should
be at least 1.5 times his or her body weight (17, 24, 36, 50, 63).
However, many plyometric activities can be safely taught to athletes
without such formalized levels of strength (figure 19.5). It is our
recommendation that plyometrics be included for all athletes whose
sports require running, landing, jumping, or cutting. As a
prerequisite, teaching proper alignment and movement mechanics
through the use of plyometric exercise has been shown repeatedly
to decrease the athlete’s risk of injury during practices and games
(50). Various authors have theorized that basic in-place jumps such
as repeated pogo jumps and countermovement jumps require
relatively low levels of strength; repeated hops and jumps may
require a basic strength level equivalent to a back squat of 1 × body
weight, bounding and depth jumps using a box 12 inches (30 cm)
tall or shorter may have a back squat strength equivalent of 1.5 ×
body weight, and depth or box jumps with a box higher than 12
inches (30 cm) may require a back squat strength equivalent of 2 ×
body weight (58).
1292

FIGURE 19.3 Proper plyometric landing technique. (a) When learning to land and stop,
the shoulders are in line with the knees, which helps place the center of gravity over the
body’s base of support. The knees are over the toes; excessive inward (valgus) movement
increases the risk of lower extremity injury; weight is evenly distributed through a flat foot
to allow a balanced deceleration position. Learning to land and stop, decelerating body
mass completely, is a precursor to learning to land and rebound (i.e., reaccelerate body
mass). (b) Proper landing technique to facilitate reactionary rebound actions; the shoulders
are in line with the knees, the ankles are stiff, and athlete contacts the ground with the
midfoot and forefoot to enable a rebound acceleration to occur. Note the alignment of the
hips, knees and toes, with the feet hip-width apart to optimize vertical or horizontal force
(depending on the subsequent movement).
Back squat equivalent strength is a descriptive term used to
infer the necessary strength capacity required to tolerate the impact
stress of the exercise so that it does not acutely overreach the
athlete and become injurious. The back squat is illustrative due to
the nature of its axial load on the total body, yet it is recognized that
not every athlete measures maximal squat strength. It is important
to note that it is not simply the magnitude of strength that is
important but the athletic quality to be able to apply the force
required within the given ground contact time. Therefore, a focus on
rate of force development as well as magnitude of force
development is an important consideration within plyometric
prescription.
1293

Balance
Balance is a lower body plyometric prerequisite that should not be
overlooked. Balance is the maintenance of a position without
movement for a given period of time. Many lower body plyometric
drills require the athlete to move in nontraditional patterns or on a
single leg. These types of drills necessitate a solid, stable base of
support on which the athlete can safely and correctly perform the
exercises. Three balance tests are provided in table 19.9, listed in
order of difficulty; each test position must be held for 30 seconds
(62). For example, an athlete beginning plyometric training for the
first time would be required to stand on one leg for 30 seconds
without falling. An experienced athlete beginning an advanced
plyometric training program must maintain a single-leg half squat for
30 seconds without falling. Additionally, the surface on which the
balance testing is performed should be the same as that used in the
plyometric drills.
1294

FIGURE 19.4 Characteristics and progressions of plyometric exercise to emphasize
eccentric loading for athletes of varying strength levels. ECC = eccentric; CON = concentric;
BW = body weight; + = low emphasis; ++ = moderate emphasis; +++ = high emphasis;
L = low height; M = moderate height; H = high height; VH = very high height; CMJ =
countermovement jump; SJ = static jump).
*overall priority is on correct skill execution and landing mechanics
**not applicable to exercises requiring landing only (ECC+++ column)
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1295

FIGURE 19.5 Theoretical relationship between strength and the optimization of
plyometric exercise performance.
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
TABLE 19.9 Balance Tests
Test*
Variations
Standing
Double leg
Single leg
Quarter squat
Double leg
Single leg
Half squat
Double leg
Single leg
*A successful test occurs when the position can be held for 30 seconds without falling.
Physical Characteristics
Athletes who weigh more than 220 pounds (100 kg) may be at an
increased risk for injury when performing plyometric exercises (50,
1296

63). Greater weight (mass) increases the compressive force on joints
during the exercises, thereby predisposing ankle, knee, and hip–
pelvic complex joints to injury. Therefore, athletes weighing over 220
pounds (100 kg) should approach high-volume and high-intensity
plyometric exercises and depth jumps from heights greater than 18
inches (46 cm) with caution (50, 63). As with other forms of
exercise, an athlete’s joint structure and previous injuries must also
be examined before he or she begins a plyometric training program.
Previous injuries or abnormalities of the spine, lower extremities, or
upper extremities may increase an athlete’s risk of injury during
plyometric exercise. Specifically, athletes with a history of muscle
strains, pathological joint laxity, or spinal dysfunction—including
vertebral disk dysfunction or compression—should use caution when
beginning a plyometric training program (28, 29, 36, 55). Ultimately,
because the body composition, strength, and technical competency
can differ between athletes who weigh the same, professional
judgment always should be applied when considering plyometric
prescription.
Equipment and Facilities
In addition to athletes’ fitness and health, the area and equipment
used for plyometric drills may significantly affect their safety.
Landing Surface
To prevent injuries, the landing surface used for lower body
plyometrics must possess adequate shock-absorbing properties. A
grass field, suspended floor, or rubber mat is a good surface choice
(36). Surfaces such as concrete, tile, and hardwood are not
recommended 
because 
they 
lack 
effective 
shock-absorbing
properties (36). Excessively thick exercise mats (6 inches [15 cm] or
thicker) may extend the amortization phase and thus not allow
efficient use of the stretch reflex. Mini-trampolines are commonly
used for beginning plyometric and balance training in rehabilitation
(32). While these devices may provide a necessary introduction to
1297

plyometrics, especially for those recovering from musculoskeletal
injury, mini-trampolines, like thick exercise mats, are not effective for
plyometric training of uninjured athletes because the amortization
phase is extended while the athlete is in contact with the elastic
surface.
Training Area
The amount of space needed depends on the drill. Most bounding
and running drills require at least 30 yards (or meters) of
straightaway, though some drills may require a straightaway of 100
yards (or meters). For most standing, box, and depth jumps, only a
minimal surface area is needed, but the ceiling height must be at
least 10 feet (3 m) to be adequate.
Equipment
Boxes used for box jumps and depth jumps must be sturdy and
should have a nonslip top. Boxes should range in height from 6 to 42
inches (15-107 cm) and should have landing surfaces of at least 18
by 24 inches (46 × 61 cm) (19). The box should be constructed of
sturdy wood (e.g., 3/4-inch [1.9 cm] plywood) or heavy-gauge metal
that is covered in a protective covering to reduce the risk of injury if
the athlete contacts the box. High density foam within a cubed
framework with solid landing surfaces is also appropriate. To further
reduce injury risk, there are several ways of making the landing
surface nonslip such as adding nonslip treads, mixing sand into the
paint used to cover the box, or affixing rubberized flooring to the top
(19).
Proper Footwear
Athletes must use footwear with good ankle and foot support; good
lateral stability; and a wide, nonslip sole (50). Ankle injury risk may
be increased in shoes with a narrow sole and poor mid-foot support,
especially with lateral movements. Shoes with insufficient foot
support may lead to arch or lower leg injuries or both, while
footwear without enough cushioning might lead to knee and hip
1298

joint damage. Shoes with excessive cushioning may also interfere
with the amortization phase process, and a shoe that has increased
inbuilt pronation (such as a weightlifting shoe) may interfere with
ground contact mechanics and therefore the safety and effectiveness
of the exercise.
Supervision
In addition to the safety considerations already outlined, close
monitoring of athletes is necessary to ensure proper technique.
Plyometric exercise is not intrinsically dangerous when performed
correctly, but as with other forms of training, poor technique may
unnecessarily predispose an athlete to injury.
Depth Jumping
There is a limit to the maximal height at which a depth jump can be
effectively and safely performed. A height of 48 inches (122 cm)
would provide a significant overload on the muscles, but the
resistance may be too great for many athletes to overcome while
maintaining correct technique (47). Jumping from such a height
increases the possibility of injury; furthermore, the amount of force
to be overcome is so great that the amortization phase is extended
and thus the purpose of the exercise is defeated. The recommended
height for depth jumps ranges from 16 to 42 inches (41-107 cm),
with 30 to 32 inches (76-81cm) being the norm (4, 21, 30, 43, 44,
48). The depth jump box height for athletes who weigh over 220
pounds (100 kg) should be 18 inches (46 cm) or less.
1299

Conclusion
The major goal of plyometric training is to rapidly apply force to
provide an overload to the agonist muscles. Although it has been
repeatedly shown that plyometric exercise increases muscular power
for athletes in a formal training program (34, 53, 65, 67), research
has yet to determine whether mechanical or neurophysiological
adaptations account for the improvement. Plyometrics should be
considered not an end in itself but part of an appropriately
periodized program that includes strength, speed, endurance, and
mobility training. Plyometrics requires an appropriate warm-up and
should be preplanned to allow adequate recovery. After the athlete
has begun a proper strength and conditioning program, plyometric
training may be used to further develop impulses and positive
transfer of training benefits.
PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Lower Body Plyometric Drills
JUMPS IN PLACE
  1  Pogo Jump  582
  2  Ankle Hop  582
  3  Squat Jump  583
  4  Jump and Reach  584
  5  Tuck Jump  585
  6  Split Squat Jump  586
  7  Cycled Split Squat Jump  587
  8  Tuck Hop  588
  9  Pike Jump  589
STANDING JUMPS
1300

10  Vertical Jump  590
11  Vertical Hop  591
12  Jump Over Barrier  591
13  Standing Long Jump  592
MULTIPLE HOPS AND JUMPS
14  Multiple Horizontal Low Hurdle Jump  593
15  Double-Leg Zigzag Jump  594
16  Linear Hop  595
17  Multiple Barrier Hop  596
18  Lateral Barrier Jump  597
19  Four-Hurdle Hop  598
20  Progressive Lateral Jump  599
BOUNDS
21  Skip  600
22  Power Skip  601
23  Lateral Skip  602
24  Linear Bound  603
25  Double-Arm Linear Bound  604
BOX DRILLS
26  Drop Step to Lateral Bound and Return  605
27  Single-Leg Push-Off  606
28  Alternating-Leg Push-Off  607
29  Lateral Push-Off  608
30  Rear Foot–Elevated Multidirectional Hop  609
31  Side-to-Side Push-Off  610
32  Box Jump  611
33  Box Hop  612
34  Lateral Box Jump  613
1301

35  Drop Freeze  614
DEPTH JUMPS
36  Depth Jump  615
37  Depth Jump to Box Jump  616
38  Depth Jump Into Directional Sprint  617
39  Depth Jump to Long Jump  618
40  Depth Jump to 180-Degree Turn  619
41  Depth Hop  620
Upper Body Plyometric Drills
THROWS
  42  Chest Pass  621
  43  Two-Hand Overhead Throw  622
  44  Rotational Throw  623
  45  Single-Arm Throw  624
  46  Power Drop  625
  47  Half-Kneeling Overhead Medicine Ball Throw for Distance  
626
  48  Single-Arm Reverse Throw  626
  49  Viking Throw for Height  628
  50  Medicine Ball Slam from Single-Leg Balance  629
PLYOMETRIC PUSH-UPS
  51  Depth Push-Up  630
  52  Lateral Travel Push-Up  631
TRUNK PLYOMETRICS
  53  45-Degree Sit-Up  632
  54  Seated Rotational Medicine Ball Throw  633
  55  Leg Pushdown  634
1302

LOWER BODY PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Jumps in Place
  1   POGO JUMP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: None or double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a slight countermovement.
Upward movement: Jump up, with primary motion at the ankle joint.
Downward movement: Land with an active flat foot contact in the
starting position, with hips and knees stiff, and immediately repeat.
Note: This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backward) or lateral movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force, which increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in flight; this makes athletes
land on their toes, which changes the nature of the
ground contact
1303

  2   ANKLE HOP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-hopping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed during the exercise.
Arm action: None or double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a slight countermovement.
Upward movement: Using the balancing foot, hop upward, with
primary motion at the ankle joint.
Downward movement: Have the ankle dorsiflexed in flight to prepare
for an active flat foot contact. (Note: The second photo does not yet
show the left foot in the needed position for landing.) Land in the
1304

starting position with the hips and knees stiff, and immediately
repeat. Repeat with the opposite leg after a brief rest.
Note: This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backward) or lateral movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force; this increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Landing off-balance so that rebound hops become
multidirectional rather than vertical
  3   SQUAT JUMP
1305

Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a squat position (thighs slightly above
parallel with the ground) with feet hip- to shoulder-width apart.
Interlock the fingers and place the hands behind the head.
Arm action: None
Preparatory movement: None
Upward movement: Explosively jump up to a maximum height.
Extend the body as tall as possible.
Downward movement: Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for flat foot landing. (Note: The second photo does not yet
show the feet in the needed position for landing.) Land in the squat
position, and immediately repeat the jump.
COMMON ERRORS
Landing and immediately jumping again before resetting
to achieve squat depth for the subsequent jump
Lack of hip and knee extension, meaning the body is not
fully extended in flight
1306

  4   JUMP AND REACH
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm with reach at the top of the jump
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up and reach for an object or
target.
Downward movement: Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for an active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position and
immediately repeat the jump.
Note: Emphasis is on vertical height with minimal delay between
jumps. Also, this drill should be performed with little horizontal
1307

(forward or backward) or lateral movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not coordinating arm action with the jump; everything
should move upward at the same time
Trunk not being vertical at takeoff, meaning that vertical
force generation is compromised and forward movement
will occur
  5   TUCK JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
1308

Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up. Pull the knees to the chest,
quickly grasp the knees with both hands, and release before landing.
Pull the ankles toward the knees in flight to prepare for an active
flat-foot landing.
Downward 
movement: 
Land 
in 
the 
starting 
position, 
and
immediately repeat the jump.
COMMON ERRORS
Pulling the knees up rather than pushing into the ground
maximally then tucking knees
Failure to perform a countermovement on subsequent
repetitions; this decreases ground contact time but
reduces vertical force generation
1309

  6   SPLIT SQUAT JUMP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a lunge position with one leg forward (hip
and knee joints flexed approximately 90 degrees) and the other
behind the midline of the body with the trunk vertical.
Arm action: Double arm or none
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up, using the arms to assist as
needed. Maximum height and power should be emphasized.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note: The second photo does not yet show
the feet positioned for landing.) When landing, maintain the lunge
position (with the same leg forward) and immediately repeat the
jump. After completing a set, rest and switch front legs.
1310

COMMON ERRORS
Lack of coordinated triple extension (hips, knees, and
ankle plantarflexion) in the takeoff, reducing the vertical
force production
Landing with the trunk leaning too far forward so the
appropriate split squat position is not achieved
  7   CYCLED SPLIT SQUAT JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a lunge position with one leg forward (hip
and knee joints flexed approximately 90 degrees) and the other
behind the midline of the body.
Arm action: Double arm or none
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up, using the arms to assist as
needed. While off the ground, switch the position of the legs.
1311

Maximum height and power should be emphasized.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankle of the lead landing leg in
preparation for an active flat-foot landing. When landing, maintain
the lunge position (opposite leg forward) and immediately repeat the
jump. Be sure not to absorb ground reaction force and sink too deep
into the lunge, because the SSC may not be able to effectively
contribute to subsequent jumps.
COMMON ERRORS
Overemphasizing a quick split rather than vertical drive
to create time for the leg switch to occur prior to landing
Landing with the trunk leaning too far forward so the
necessary split squat position is not achieved
  8   TUCK HOP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical
1312

Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-hopping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed during the exercise.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively hop up. Pull the knee of the hopping
leg to the chest, grasp the knee with both hands, and release before
landing.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
immediately repeat the jump using the same leg. Complete a set,
then repeat with the opposite leg after a brief rest.
COMMON ERRORS
Lack of vertical height achieved before achieving the
tuck position
Poorly coordinated sequencing of the arm action relative
to the upward drive from the legs
1313

  9   PIKE JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up. Keeping the legs straight
and together, try to lift them to the front and try to touch the toes
with the hands.
Downward 
movement: 
Land 
in 
the 
starting 
position, 
and
immediately repeat the jump.
COMMON ERRORS
1314

Overemphasis on bringing the legs forward rather than
pushing into the ground to achieve vertical height
Poor landing position due to lack of recovery from the
pike
Standing Jumps
  10   VERTICAL JUMP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Explosively jump up, using both arms to assist,
and reach for a target.
1315

Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note: The second photo does not yet show
the feet in the ideal position for landing, because the athlete is still
rising.) Land in the starting position, and immediately repeat the
action for repetitions.
COMMON ERRORS
Poor sequencing of the forward and upward arm
(shoulder) flexion in sequence with lower limb triple
extension, which results in a coordination loss of upward
momentum
Inappropriately deep countermovement, which increases
the amortization phase and therefore the ground contact
time between jumps
1316

  11   VERTICAL HOP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-jumping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement on the
hopping leg. Bring the other leg behind the body.
Upward movement: Explosively hop up, driving the non-hopping leg
forward and up to assist momentum. Use both arms to assist, and
1317

reach for a target.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankle in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
immediately repeat the action for repetitions. Repeat with the
opposite leg after a brief rest.
COMMON ERRORS
Not using the non-hopping leg in a coordinated manner
to increase vertical momentum
Not sequencing the arm action with the upward
movement of the lower limb so vertical momentum is
lost
  12   JUMP OVER BARRIER
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Equipment: A barrier such as a cone or hurdle
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Take off with a full triple extension of hips,
knees, and ankles. (Note: The second photo should show the athlete
in a tall position to demonstrate full triple extension after takeoff. It
also does not yet show the feet in the correct position for landing.)
Jump over the barrier with both legs, maximizing the height of the
center of mass and using only sufficient hip and knee flexion to clear
the barrier. Keep the knees and feet together without lateral
deviation.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for a
stable flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position and reset.
Repeat until the set is complete.
1318

Note: The height of the barrier should be progressively increased
(e.g., from a cone to a hurdle to a higher hurdle) as the athlete
adapts to the intensity of the drill.
COMMON ERRORS
Hurdle height insufficient to challenge the athlete to
maximally push from the ground to achieve an extended
position above the hurdle
Inappropriate landing position whereby the athlete lands
in an unstable position
  13   STANDING LONG JUMP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Horizontal
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
1319

Upward movement: Explosively jump forward and up, using both
arms to assist, with a goal of achieving maximal horizontal distance.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land on both feet. Allow recovery time
between jumps.
Note: This is typically a single ballistic effort, with several repetitions
in a set. However, it can be done as multiple jumps in sequence.
Care should be taken so that the forward momentum of the athlete
does not cause overrotation in the sagittal plane. Coach the athlete
to jump up and out; otherwise the tendency is for too much
horizontal momentum for the athlete to control.
COMMON ERRORS
Inefficient takeoff angle, resulting in suboptimal flight
distance; the lean should be far enough forward to
optimize horizontal propulsion but not so far that the
center of mass is too anteriorly located to optimize
ground reaction forces
Lack of full extension in the legs and full flexion in the
shoulders at takeoff, which reduces the opportunity for
ground reaction impulse to be created
1320

Multiple Hops and Jumps
  14   MULTIPLE HORIZONTAL LOW
HURDLE JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Jump as far forward as possible and over the
first barrier. Coach the athlete to jump “upward and outward” and
“get as tall as possible over the hurdle” rather than tuck jump to
clear and not extend the body fully.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
1321

immediately repeat the jump, optimizing ground contact time to
control impulse production.
Note: A low hurdle height should encourage low flight time and
lower ground contact time. The exercise can be increased in
intensity with a higher hurdle height, but this will typically influence
the nature of the ground contact.
COMMON ERRORS
Incorrect hurdle height or a less-than-maximal push
from the ground to achieve full extension position when
clearing the hurdle
Inappropriate landing mechanics that increase ground
contact time in between hurdles
1322

  15   DOUBLE-LEG ZIGZAG JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Diagonal
Equipment: Place 8 to 12 hurdles 18 to 24 inches (46-61 cm) apart
in a zigzag pattern.
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart. Stand on the outside of the first hurdle. Elbows
should be flexed at 90 degrees and held at the sides of the body.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
1323

Upward movement: Jump from the outside of the first hurdle to the
outside of the second hurdle, keeping the hips and shoulders facing
the direction of travel.
Downward movement: In flight, dorsiflex the ankles in preparation
for an active flat-foot landing. Immediately on landing on the outside
of the second hurdle, change direction and jump diagonally over the
second hurdle to the outside of the third hurdle. Continue jumping
over all the hurdles.
Note: Hurdle height can significantly alter the intensity and in-flight
body position of the athlete. The athlete should be as extended as
possible to clear the hurdle. (Note: The second photo shows the
athlete clearing the hurdle too high relative to the hurdle height and
with excessive knee flexion.) Correct execution will result in the hips
and knees being as stiff as possible on landing to optimize ground
contact. Intensity of the drill can be significantly increased by
performing hops with only one leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Not adjusting the body angle coming into a landing to
keep the center of mass going in the desired direction of
the next jump; this significantly increases ground
contact time
Not “attacking the ground” from a dorsiflexed ankle
position, which increases ground contact time
1324

  16   LINEAR HOP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-jumping leg is held in a stationary position with the hip and
knee flexed during the exercise.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement on the
hopping leg. Bring the other leg behind the body.
Upward movement: Explosively hop forward, driving from the hip,
knee, and ankle, using both arms and the opposite knee to assist
the movement.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note: The second photo does not yet show
the feet in the needed position for landing.) Land in the starting
position, use an active flat-foot contact to optimize the ground
contact time, and immediately repeat the hop for the desired
1325

number of repetitions. Repeat with the opposite leg after a brief
rest.
COMMON ERRORS
Excessive flexion of the hip, knee, and ankle on landing,
which unnecessarily increases the amortization phase
and ground contact time
Hopping with the weight too far forward in the foot,
which reduces ground reaction forces and limits optimal
force production to maximize flight distance
  17   MULTIPLE BARRIER HOP
1326

Intensity level: Medium to high
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Equipment: Two to 10 barriers such as cones or hurdles
Starting position: Facing the first barrier, get into a comfortable,
single-leg upright stance with the contralateral hip and knee flexed
to 90 degrees.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement on the
hopping leg. Bring the other leg behind the body.
Upward movement: Explosively hop forward, driving from the hip,
knee, and ankle over the first barrier as tall as possible, using
necessary hip and knee flexion to clear the barrier.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing in the starting position, and immediately
repeat the jump over the second barrier.
Note: Intensity level of this exercise can be increased from medium
to high by progressively increasing the height of the barrier (e.g.,
from a cone to a hurdle). Increasing the intensity of the hop may
increase the ground contact time and the amortization phase.
COMMON ERRORS
Incorrect hurdle height or a less-than-maximal push
from the ground to achieve full extension position when
clearing the hurdle
Inappropriate landing mechanics, which increases
ground contact time between hurdles
1327

  18   LATERAL BARRIER JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Lateral and vertical
Equipment: A barrier such as a cone or hurdle
Starting position: With the barrier to one side, get into a
comfortable, upright stance with feet hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Leaning out of the countermovement in the
direction of travel, use a powerful triple extension to jump over the
barrier as tall as possible with both legs, using necessary hip and
knee flexion to clear the barrier. (Note: The second photo shows the
1328

athlete clearing the hurdle too high relative to the hurdle height and
with too much knee flexion.) Keep the hips and shoulder square and
the knees and feet together without lateral deviation.
Downward movement: Rotate over the hurdle so the lean is in the
direction of the subsequent jump on landing. Dorsiflex the ankles in
preparation for an active flat-foot landing on the opposite side of the
barrier, and immediately repeat the jump to the starting side. (Note:
The third photo does not show the athlete leaning back toward the
starting side for the return jump.)
Note: The intensity level of the lateral barrier hop can be increased
from medium to high by progressively increasing the height of the
barrier or by performing movement with one leg only (i.e., a hop),
which is an excellent exercise for aiding direction change capacity in
the athlete. By reversing the direction of movement, the ground
contact time and the amortization phase of the movement are
changed compared to movements in the same direction. This will be
influenced further by the height of the hurdle.
COMMON ERRORS
Not maintaining a square hip and shoulder position, so
the jump does not stay in the frontal plane
Lack of preparatory lean in both takeoff (center of mass
should lean in the direction of travel) and landing (orient
the body so that it is leaning back toward the start for
the return jump), which increases the ground contact
time and reduces the effectiveness of the drill
1329

  19   FOUR-HURDLE HOP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Lateral and vertical
Equipment: Four hurdles: two pairs of hurdles. Each hurdle in the
pair is separated by 12 inches (30 cm). Each pair is separated by 18
inches (46 cm).
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on the right
foot; the line of four hurdles will be to the left. The non-jumping leg
is held in a stationary position with the hip and knee flexed during
the exercise.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Movements:
1330

1. Lean in the direction of travel.
2. Explosively hop left over the first hurdle with the right foot,
using both arms to assist.
3. Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an active flat-foot
landing.
4. Land on the right foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next hurdle.
5. Land on the right foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next two hurdles.
6. Land on the left foot, and immediately hop right over the first
hurdle with the left foot, using both arms to assist.
7. Land on the left foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next three hurdles; finish by landing on the right foot.
COMMON ERRORS
Not reflecting subsequent takeoff direction in the body
lean (i.e., the center of mass in the takeoff and the
landing before direction change should reflect the
direction of travel in the subsequent movement; failure
to do so increases the ground contact time and reduces
the effectiveness of the drill)
Not increasing ground contact time for both the two-
hurdle hop and the change of direction movement,
meaning insufficient force is produced in the jump
1331

  20   PROGRESSIVE LATERAL JUMP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Diagonally lateral and vertical
Equipment: String tied at athlete’s eye level and loosely secured to
the ground at a 45-degree angle to the ground
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one side
of the string next to the anchor on the ground.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Movements:
1. Explosively jump diagonally (sideways and forward) over the
string using both arms to assist the movement.
1332

2. Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an active flat-foot
landing.
3. Land on the other side of the string, and immediately repeat the
jump diagonally forward. Continue the jumping sequence over
the string as it gets progressively higher.
Note: As the string gets higher, the athlete will need a longer ground
contact time and more hip and knee flexion to clear the string.
Ensure that the anchor on the string enables the string to give way
should the athlete make contact with it.
COMMON ERRORS
Changing the orientation of the hips (i.e., rotate in the
transverse plane) during takeoff, which increases the
ground contact time on the subsequent jump
Not increasing ground contact time and hip and knee
flexion through the sequence, meaning insufficient force
is produced as the required jump height increases
1333

Bounds
  21   SKIP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
1334

Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion with the ankle dorsiflexed.
Arm action: Reciprocal (as one leg is lifted, the opposite arm is
lifted)
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement on one leg.
Upward movement: Drive up and forward on one leg. The opposite
leg should remain in the starting flexed position until landing.
Downward movement: Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately repeat the skip with the opposite leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Rotating at the hip and shoulders during the movement
(which should be in the sagittal plane only), detracting
from the velocity achieved
Coordination errors in the reciprocal arm and leg action,
which detract from the forward momentum achieved
1335

  22   POWER SKIP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical and horizontal
Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion with the ankle dorsiflexed.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement on one leg.
Upward movement: Drive up and forward on one leg. Move the
flexed, non-jumping leg up and into greater hip and knee flexion
while jumping. Both arms should be used to assist with the upward
movement.
Downward movement: Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately repeat the skip with the opposite leg.
Note: Emphasis is on high-quality ground contact and leg drive as
athletes determine the effectiveness of the skip. This movement
should be more vertical and with a faster ground contact than the
higher intensity linear bounding drills listed later in the chapter.
COMMON ERRORS
Not attacking the ground with significant intensity to
accelerate the center of mass forward in subsequent
takeoff; this influences the subsequent flight phases and
landings
Coordination errors in the double-arm action, which
detracts from the forward momentum achieved
1336

  23   LATERAL SKIP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical and lateral
Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion with the ankle dorsiflexed. This leg should be
opposite to the direction of movement (i.e., if the skip is to the right,
the left leg should be raised).
Arm action: Reciprocal (as one leg is lifted, the opposite arm is
lifted)
Preparatory movement: Drive the lifted leg forcefully toward the
ground and away from the direction of movement so that it contacts
the ground outside of the base of support.
Upward movement: The lateral drive of the downward leg will cause
the body to move up and sideways away from the foot contact. As
this happens, the other leg should flex at the hip and knee in flight.
The drive leg typically takes a small adjustment step to aid stability
and rhythm in the action.
1337

Downward movement: Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately repeat the skip, continuing the lateral movement for a
number of repetitions or over a given distance, then use the
opposite leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Not contacting the ground with sufficient lateral distance
from the hip to cause sideways momentum to occur
Not controlling rotations at the hip and shoulders during
the movement, which detracts from the lateral velocity
achieved
1338

  24   LINEAR BOUND
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Single arm
1339

Preparatory movement: Jog at a comfortable pace; begin the drill
with the left foot forward.
Upward movement: Push off with the left foot as it contacts the
ground. During push-off, bring the right leg forward by flexing the
thigh to a position approximately parallel with the ground and the
knee at 90 degrees, with the ankle stiff and dorsiflexed.
During this flight phase of the drill, reach forward with the left arm.
Downward movement: Attack the ground with an active flat-foot
contact. Land on the right leg, and immediately repeat the sequence
on the opposite side.
Note: A linear bound is an exaggeration of the running gait; the goal
is to cover as great a distance as possible during each stride.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient horizontal velocity to initiate the
driving action of the bound
Not achieving sufficient height with the lead leg in the
flight phase to attack the ground with enough force to
accelerate the athlete forward
Overreaching with the lead leg and then not driving
down under the hips
1340

  25   DOUBLE-ARM LINEAR BOUND
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Horizontal and vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Jog at a comfortable pace; begin the drill
with the right foot forward.
Upward movement: Push off with the right foot as it contacts the
ground. During push-off, bring the left leg forward by flexing the
thigh to a position approximately parallel with the ground, the knee
at 90 degrees, and the ankle dorsiflexed. During this flight phase of
the drill, reach forward with both arms. Sequence the arm swing so
that they come forward from behind the body into landing, and
forward from the hips to reach in front of the body during takeoff.
Downward movement: Land with an active flat-foot on the left leg
and immediately repeat the sequence on the opposite side.
Note: A bound is an exaggeration of the running gait; the goal is to
cover as great a distance as possible during each stride.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient horizontal velocity to initiate the
driving action of the bound
Coordination errors between arm and leg action; both
arms should be forward as the athlete takes off and
behind as the athlete lands
Overreaching with the lead leg
1341

Box Drills
  26   DROP STEP TO LATERAL BOUND
AND RETURN
Intensity level: High
Direction: Lateral and vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
Arm action: None
Preparatory movement: Step from the box with the right foot, ankles
dorsiflexed.
Downward movement: Land on the ground with active flat foot
contact in the right foot.
Upward movement: Immediately push up and sideways toward the
left. Land on the left foot and immediately push back toward the
1342

right. Land on the right foot in front of the box and immediately
stabilize the landing, with hips and knees aligned with toes.
Note: The trunk orientation should change in the flight so that the
athlete is leaning toward the intended direction of travel into the
landing.
COMMON ERRORS
Not orienting the body in landing to facilitate optimal
lateral takeoff
Absorbing the landing force through excessive hip and
knee flexion, prolonging the ground contact time
Crossing the foot of the non-landing leg behind the
landing leg
1343

  27   SINGLE-LEG PUSH-OFF
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand facing the plyometric box with one foot on
the ground and one foot on the box. The heel of the foot on the box
should be near the box’s closest edge.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Lift the front foot slightly so that it can be
driven down into the box.
Upward movement: Drive the front foot down into the box to cause
an upward jumping action.
Downward movement: Land with the same foot on the box; this foot
should land just before the ground foot. Immediately repeat the
movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not orienting the body at takeoff to optimally generate
vertical force
Not creating sufficient vertical force with the front foot
1344

  28   ALTERNATING-LEG PUSH-OFF
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand facing the plyometric box with one foot on
the ground and one foot on the box. The heel of the foot on the box
should be near the box’s closest edge.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Lift the front foot slightly so that it can be
driven down into the box.
Upward movement: Drive the front foot down into the box to cause
an upward jumping action.
Downward movement: Land with the opposite foot on the box; this
foot should land just before the ground foot. Immediately repeat the
movement, reversing the feet each repetition.
1345

COMMON ERRORS
Not creating sufficient vertical force to enable the switch
of legs to occur above the box
Asynchronous actions between the front leg and back
leg, which means that the high knee position at the end
of the jump does not occur at the point of maximum
height or leg extension; this results in poor landing
positions that prolong ground contact times for the next
jump
  29   LATERAL PUSH-OFF
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 10 to 18 inches (25-46 cm) high
1346

Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box with one
foot on the ground and one foot on the box. The inside of the foot
on the box should be near the box’s closest edge.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: None or slightly lift the foot off the box.
Upward movement: Jump up using the foot on the box to push off.
Downward movement: Land with the same foot on the box; this foot
should land just before the ground foot. Immediately repeat the
movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
Poor coordination or strength deficiencies, which means
that peak height of the center of mass does not occur at
the same time as maximal extension of the lower limbs
and flexion in the shoulders
1347

  30   REAR FOOT–ELEVATED
MULTIDIRECTIONAL HOP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical and lateral
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high; mini-
hurdle, 6 to 24 inches (15-61 cm) high
Starting position: Start in a deep split squat position, with the rear
foot elevated on a plyometric box (or equivalent). The foot on the
ground should rest parallel to the mini-hurdle.
Preparatory movement: None
1348

Upward movement: Push off with the standing leg to rise vertically
and sideways over the mini-hurdle. Keep the ankle dorsiflexed in
preparation for an active flat-foot contact with the ground on
landing.
Downward movement: Land with the same foot on the opposite side
of the hurdle. Immediately repeat the movement to the opposite
side.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
to push out of the squat position and clear the hurdle
with full extension in the hip and knee
Absorbing too much of the landing impact into the hip
and knee of the front leg, increasing ground contact time
1349

  31   SIDE-TO-SIDE PUSH-OFF
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 10 to 18 inches (25-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box with one
foot on the ground and one foot on the box. The inside of the foot
on the box should be near the box’s closest edge.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: None
Upward movement: Jump up and over the box using the foot on the
box to push off.
Downward movement: Land with the opposite foot on the opposite
side of the top of the box; this foot should land just before the
ground foot. Immediately repeat the movement to the opposite side.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
Poor coordination or strength deficiencies, which mean
that peak height of the center of mass does not occur at
the same time as maximal extension of the lower limbs
and flexion in the shoulders
1350

  32   BOX JUMP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical and slightly horizontal
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Facing the plyometric box, get into a comfortable,
upright stance with feet hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
1351

Upward movement: Forcefully triple extend to jump onto the top of
the box using both legs.
Downward movement: Land on both feet in a half-squat position,
step down from the box, and repeat.
Note: The arm action contributes significantly to the upward
momentum of this jump. By having athletes perform the movement
with their hands on their hips, or their fingers interlocked behind the
head and elbows pointing sideways, the lower body power required
to perform the jump can be significantly increased.
COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground, maximizing the forward and upward
movement of the body
Not coordinating arm actions with the forward
movement of the body; powerful shoulder flexion should
be simultaneous with the lower body jumping action
1352

  33   BOX HOP
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical and slightly horizontal
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 42 inches (15-107 cm) high
Starting position: Facing the plyometric box, get into a comfortable,
upright stance on one foot. The non-jumping leg is held in a
stationary position with the hip and knee flexed during the exercise.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Forcefully triple extend and hop onto the top of
the box.
Downward movement: Land on the same foot in a triple flexion
position (hip, knee, and ankle flexed and stable), step down from
the box, and repeat.
Note: Although significant force may be required to hop onto boxes
in excess of 30 inches (76 cm), this is a low-intensity drill because
the athlete is accelerating against gravity and lands with less force
than his or her body weight because of this.
COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground, maximizing the forward and upward
movement of the body
Not coordinating arm actions with the forward
movement of the body; powerful shoulder flexion should
be simultaneous with the lower body jumping action
1353

  34   LATERAL BOX JUMP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical and slightly horizontal
Equipment: Plyometric box, 6 to 42 inches (15-107 cm) high
Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box; get into a
comfortable, upright stance with feet hip-width apart.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement.
Upward movement: Jump onto the top of the box using both legs.
Downward movement: Land on both feet in a half-squat position and
jump down, landing with an active flat-foot contact and optimal
ground contact to enable the jump to be repeated in the opposite
direction.
Note: If the athlete steps down rather than jumps down from the
box, the drill would be classified as a low-intensity ballistic exercise.
Also, this drill can be made into a low-intensity ballistic drill by
stepping down off the box and jumping up and laterally only.
1354

COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground (and flexion of the shoulders), maximizing
the forward and upward movement of the body
Not leaning into the jump; bringing the center of mass
outside the base of support in the frontal plane will
assist the lateral action of the jump
  35   DROP FREEZE
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
1355

Arm action: None
Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Land flat footed on the ground with both
feet, quickly absorbing the impact on landing. Ensure the hips,
knees, and toes align, with the trunk vertical. Step back onto the box
and repeat.
Note: This drill teaches joint alignment and landing mechanics and is
often the first drill used in plyometric teaching and rehabilitation
progressions. Also, this can also be performed as a single-leg landing
drill.
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction forces while landing through
hip and knee flexion, rather than landing and
instantaneously holding position to develop load
tolerance
Losing the knee alignment with the toes when landing in
a knee valgus position, potentially compromising the
knee joint
1356

Depth Jumps
  36   DEPTH JUMP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
Arm action: Double arm
1357

Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles and land on the ground
with an active flat-foot contact with both feet.
Upward movement: On landing, immediately jump up as high as
possible.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contact time and
resultant vertical force production. On landing, emphasis should be
on jumping up, with minimal horizontal movement (less than what is
shown in the third photo).
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound jump
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates the active flat-foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1358

  37   DEPTH JUMP TO BOX JUMP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical and horizontal
Equipment: Two plyometric boxes, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box, facing the second box; toes
should be near the edge of the box.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in flight in preparation
for an active flat-foot landing with both feet.
Upward movement: On landing, immediately jump onto the second
box.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
1359

there is an optimal relationship between ground contact time and
resultant vertical force production. Also, the distance between boxes
depends on experience and ability; the greater the distance between
boxes, the higher the intensity of the jump. Begin with the boxes
placed 24 inches (61 cm) apart.
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound jump
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates active flat-foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1360

  38   DEPTH JUMP INTO DIRECTIONAL
SPRINT
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical and lateral
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high; a
partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
1361

Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing with both feet. Have a partner point to the
right or left just before landing.
Upward movement: On landing, immediately sprint in the direction
determined by the partner.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum.
COMMON ERRORS
The athlete prioritizing the sprint over landing
mechanics, leading to poor alignment on landing
The partner signaling which direction to sprint too late
for the athlete to prepare for landing and a reactionary
sprint; body lean and weight distribution between the
inside and outside of the feet are important
considerations for successful sprints from landing
1362

  39   DEPTH JUMP TO LONG JUMP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical and horizontal
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for a flat-
foot landing on both feet.
1363

Upward movement: On landing, immediately jump forward as far as
possible with both feet.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contact and
resultant horizontal projection.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving an optimal forward-leaning angle through
landing (i.e., too vertical and the ground contact time is
increased or horizontal distance is lost, whereas leaning
too far forward reduces the ground reaction force
applied)
Not pushing maximally into the ground to optimize the
lower limb push for horizontal distance
1364

1365

  40   DEPTH JUMP TO 180-DEGREE
TURN
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical and horizontal
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Step from the box.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing with both feet.
Upward movement: On landing, immediately jump up as high as
possible with both feet. While in the air, turn 180 degrees to land
facing the opposite direction.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum.
COMMON ERRORS
Not controlling the rotational component of the rebound
takeoff, leading to poor joint alignment in the 180-
degree landing
Not achieving sufficient ground contact to enable a
rebound flight time that is long enough for a full turn to
be completed
1366

  41   DEPTH HOP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the box.
Arm action: Double arm
Preparatory movement: Step from the box with one foot.
Downward movement: Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing on one foot.
Upward movement: On landing, immediately hop up as high as
possible with the landing foot. The other leg should be actively
flexed during the upward movement to contribute to vertical
momentum.
Note: When stepping from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustments will change the height from which the exercise is
1367

performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contact time and
resultant vertical and horizontal force. This is a very advanced form
of the depth jump and should be performed only by those with
adequate experience, ability, and strength as demonstrated in other
versions of the depth jump.
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; the hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound hop
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates the active flat foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1368

UPPER BODY PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Throws
  42   CHEST PASS
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Forward
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 30 pounds (4-
14 kg); wall or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the ball to chest level with the elbows flexed.
1369

Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement in the hips,
knees, and ankles as well as the arms (i.e., cocking the arms by
moving them slightly backward before the throw).
Arm action: Extend the legs forcefully, and transfer the power to
both arms, throwing the ball to the wall or partner by extending the
elbows. When the wall or partner returns the ball, catch it, return to
the starting position, and immediately repeat the movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not initiating the movement from the legs, reducing the
impulse to the ball
Not coordinating or sequencing the transfer of power
from the lower body to the upper body, reducing the
impulse to the ball
1370

  43   TWO-HAND OVERHEAD THROW
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Forward and down
1371

Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 20 pounds (4-
9 kg); wall or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the ball overhead.
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement (i.e., cock
the arms by moving them slightly backward before the throw).
Arm action: Using both arms, throw the ball to the wall or partner,
keeping the elbows extended. When the wall or partner returns the
ball, catch the ball and immediately repeat the throw. The partners
can also bounce the ball on the ground between them for a
downward movement and a catch on the rebound.
COMMON ERRORS
Arching the back in the start position, increasing lumbar
spine involvement (rather than hip flexion) in the
throwing action
Not coordinating or sequencing downward throwing
action so the optimal horizontal distance is not achieved
1372

  44   ROTATIONAL THROW
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Forward through frontal plane
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 35 pounds (4-
16 kg); wall
Starting position: Start in a lunge stance. The front leg (with the hip,
knee, and ankle aligned) should face the wall approximately 3 to 6
feet (1-2 m) away. The rear leg should be externally rotated at the
hip so that the foot is flat on the ground and pointing approximately
parallel to the wall. Hold the ball at waist height in front of the body.
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement so that the
ball is brought back outside of the hip furthest from the wall and the
1373

weight is shifted to this hip. (A countermovement for plyometric
throws requires cocking the arms—that is, moving the arms slightly
backward before the actual throw.)
Arm action: Initiate the movement with a rotational drive of the hips
that continues through the trunk, bringing the ball across the body
so that it gains momentum. Using both arms, complete the
rotational arc of the ball so that it is released and thrown against the
wall as it passes the front hip. Catch the rebound, and immediately
repeat the movement.
Note: This exercise can be made more of a hip-initiated movement
by shifting the weight onto the rear foot and abducting the hip
(frontal plane) to bring weight onto the rear foot; this variation may
benefit baseball pitchers seeking more leg-driven throwing action.
Golfers may find it beneficial to rotate the hip in the transverse plane
(not move in the frontal plane). Both variations enable the rear hip
to initiate the action and accelerate the trunk rotation.
COMMON ERRORS
Rotating from the lumbar spine and trunk rather than
shifting weight to facilitate the hip drive
Over-relying on the upper body to throw the ball
compared to using the lower body and hip rotation to
enable a speed multiplication effect through the trunk to
achieve greater impulse on the ball
1374

  45   SINGLE-ARM THROW
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Forward
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 1 to 5 pounds (0.5-
2.3 kg); wall or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the ball in one hand to a position of 90 degrees of
shoulder abduction and 90 degrees of elbow flexion, with the arm
rotated so the forearm is perpendicular to the ground.
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement (i.e., cock
the arm by moving it slightly backward before the throw).
1375

Arm action: Using one arm, throw the ball to the wall or partner.
When the wall or partner returns the ball, catch the ball and return
to the starting position, allow the shoulder to externally rotate
slightly, and immediately repeat the throw.
Note: This drill may also be performed using a natural throwing
motion. Performing the action from a half-kneeling position may help
isolate the upper body action of the throwing motion.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving a stable throwing position due to lack of
thoracic mobility and overcompensations through
lumbar spine flexion
Not throwing from the shoulder but rotating through the
trunk (lumbar spine); this is likely to occur when the ball
is too heavy for the athlete
1376

  46   POWER DROP
Intensity level: High
1377

Direction: Upward
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 40 pounds (2-
18 kg); partner; plyometric box 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Lie supine on the ground with elbows extended
and both shoulders in approximately 90 degrees of flexion; the head
should be near the base of the box. The partner should be on the
box with the medicine ball held above the athlete’s arms.
Preparatory movement: None
Arm action: When the partner drops the ball, catch it using both
arms and immediately throw the ball back up to the partner.
COMMON ERRORS
Catching the ball too high and absorbing the impact
force, increasing the amortization phase
Releasing the medicine ball too early, reducing the
potential vertical impulse to the ball
1378

  47   HALF-KNEELING OVERHEAD
MEDICINE BALL THROW FOR DISTANCE
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Forward
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); wall or partner
1379

Starting position: Start in a half-kneeling position, with the kneeling
knee directly under the hip of the supporting leg and the hip and
knee of the stance leg flexed to approximately 90 degrees with the
hip, knee, and toe aligned. The trunk should be upright, facing the
wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m) away (not shown). Raise
the ball above the head with the elbows extended.
Preparatory movement: Begin with a countermovement in the trunk
as well as the arms, cocking the arms (i.e., moving the arms slightly
backward, from the shoulder, before the actual throw).
Arm action: Using both arms, throw the ball to the wall or partner by
flexing the trunk and extending the shoulders, maintaining a straight
arm position. When the wall or partner returns the ball, return to the
starting position, and immediately repeat the movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Overextending the trunk in the start position,
detrimentally increasing the involvement of the lumbar
spine
Producing a cross-body throwing motion (either from not
having the ball directly overhead or by finishing with the
hands toward one hip); this produces trunk rotation,
which may increase the distance but changes the
exercise from an isolated sagittal plane movement
1380

  48   SINGLE-ARM REVERSE THROW
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Backward
Equipment: Small medicine or plyometric ball weighing 2 to 30
pounds (1-14 kg); partner
Starting position: Start in a tall-kneeling position, with the kneeling
knee directly under the hip and the trunk upright, facing away from
a partner who is standing approximately 1 to 2 feet (30-61 cm)
behind the athlete. The partner starts with the ball. The athlete
starts with the throwing arm raised above the head with the elbow
extended.
Preparatory movement: The partner throws the ball over the
athlete’s head so that its trajectory takes it an arm’s length in front
of the athlete, traveling toward the opposite knee to the raised arm.
Arm action: The athlete tracks the ball in a diagonal pattern with the
throwing arm and catches it with an overhand grip before it hits the
ground. Once caught, the athlete keeps the elbow extended while
flexing the shoulder in the diagonal pattern, moving to a release
1381

point where the ball is thrown back to the partner when the elbow is
fully extended. Immediately repeat the movement.
Note: Because this exercise trains smaller muscle groups involved in
scapular control, large increases in implement weight can make a big
difference to the intensity of the action.
COMMON ERRORS
Using compensatory muscle recruitments to control the
shoulder and throw the ball, compromising the objective
of the drill
Not catching the ball with sufficient arm extension to
challenge the deceleration–reacceleration moments
through the rotator cuff as a dynamic shoulder stabilizer
1382

1383

  49   VIKING THROW FOR HEIGHT
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 10 to 50 pounds
(5-23 kg)
Starting position: Start in an upright stance with the medicine ball
held in straight arms in front of the middle of the body.
Preparatory movement: Initiate a countermovement by performing a
deep and rapid squat action, keeping the ball held in straight arms.
Arm action: From the base of the countermovement, perform a rapid
triple extension of the hips, knees, and ankles to drive the ball
vertically. As the body rises, continue the upward momentum of the
ball so that it is released and thrown as high as possible at the top
of the triple extension.
COMMON ERRORS
Not optimizing leg extension and transferring power to
the upper body, reducing the impulse to the medicine
ball
Releasing the ball too early (before full leg and trunk
extension and shoulder flexion), reducing the impulse to
the medicine ball
1384

  50   MEDICINE BALL SLAM FROM
SINGLE-LEG BALANCE
Intensity level: Low
Direction: Downward
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 10 to 30 pounds
(5-14 kg)
Starting position: Start in a single leg Romanian deadlift position,
with the trunk parallel to the ground and the hips hinged and level
with one leg extended straight behind the body. The stance foot
should be flat on the ground with weight distributed toward the heel.
The shoulders should be flexed so the straight arms are holding the
medicine ball level with the head.
Preparatory movement: Initiate a small countermovement by flexing
the shoulders.
1385

Arm action: Keeping the arms straight, slam the ball directly down
into the ground, maintaining a stable trunk and hip position. Catch
the rebound and repeat the movement, then repeat on the
contralateral leg.
Note: With the shoulder position, small increases in load can make a
big impact on drill intensity. This drill also can be adapted to a chest-
dominant pattern by starting with the ball held at the chest and
slammed into the ground from there.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving a stable and balanced position at the hips
to form a stable platform from which to throw the ball
Hyperextending into the lumbar spine to achieve
sufficient power to throw the ball to the ground rather
than throwing from the shoulder
1386

Plyometric Push-Ups
  51   DEPTH PUSH-UP
Intensity level: Medium
Direction: Vertical
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball (or stable implement of
similar height)
Starting position: Lie in a push-up position, with the hands on the
medicine ball and elbows extended.
Preparatory movement: None
1387

Downward movement: Quickly remove the hands from the medicine
ball and drop down. Contact the ground with hands slightly wider
than hip-width apart and elbows slightly flexed. Allow the chest to
almost touch the medicine ball by letting the elbows flex.
Upward movement: Immediately and explosively push up by fully
extending the elbows. Quickly place the palms on the medicine ball
and repeat the movement.
Note: When the upper body is at maximal height during the upward
movement, the hands should be higher than the medicine ball.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient tension in the arms to stop the
downward movement of the chest, which collapses onto
the medicine ball
Not achieving sufficient bilateral vertical force to land
with both hands onto the medicine ball in a balanced
fashion
1388

  52   LATERAL TRAVEL PUSH-UP
Intensity level: High
Direction: Lateral
Equipment: Medicine ball or a stable implement of similar height
Starting position: Get into a push-up position, with one hand on the
medicine ball (elbow partially flexed) and one hand on the ground,
elbow extended (not shown).
Preparatory movement: None
Downward movement: Keeping both hands in place, rapidly drop
down into a push-up deep enough so that the chest is level with the
top of the medicine ball (or lower).
Drill movement: Immediately and explosively push up and sideways
by fully extending the elbows. The trunk should move laterally
across the medicine ball while quickly switching hands (the hand
that was on the ground now lands on the medicine ball, and vice
versa). Immediately on landing, repeat the movement in the
opposite direction (alternate hands with each repetition).
Note: When the upper body is at maximal height during the upward
movement, both hands should be above the medicine ball.
COMMON ERRORS
Leading the vertical movement with the hips rather than
pushing through the upper body
Not achieving sufficient vertical height to travel across
the ball (which should not move)
1389

Trunk Plyometrics
  53   45-DEGREE SIT-UP
Intensity level: Medium
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); a partner
1390

Starting position: Sit on the ground with the trunk at an
approximately 45-degree angle. The partner should be in front with
the medicine ball.
Preparatory movement: The partner throws the ball to the athlete’s
outstretched hands.
Drill action: Once the partner throws the ball, the athlete catches it
using both arms with minimal trunk extension and immediately
returns the ball to the partner.
Note: The force used to return the ball to the partner should come
predominantly from the abdominal muscles.
COMMON ERRORS
Extending at the hips to absorb the force of the ball,
increasing the amortization phase and reducing the
efficacy of the exercise
Not keeping the foot in contact with the ground,
reducing the stable base from which to exert force
1391

  54   SEATED ROTATIONAL MEDICINE
BALL THROW
Intensity level: Medium
Equipment: Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); a wall or partner
Starting position: Sit on the ground with the trunk at an
approximately 45-degree angle. The partner should stand to the side
with the medicine ball.
Preparatory movement: The partner throws the ball to the athlete’s
outstretched hands.
Drill action: Once the partner throws the ball, the athlete should
track it across the body and catch it using both arms with minimal
1392

trunk extension. The rotation of the trunk should be decelerated and
then rotated in the opposite direction to immediately return the ball
to the partner.
Note: The force used to return the ball to the partner should come
predominantly from the abdominal muscles and trunk rotation.
COMMON ERRORS
Not rotating sufficiently to optimize the SSC within the
trunk musculature
Not keeping the foot in contact with the ground,
reducing the stable base from which to exert force
1393

  55   LEG PUSHDOWN
Intensity level: High
Equipment: A partner
Starting position: Lie on the ground with slightly flexed knees and
the hips flexed to 90 degrees (not shown). The hands should hold
the partner’s ankles for stability (shown).
1394

Preparatory movement: Brace the core. Breathe in and pull the ribs
down toward the hips to tighten the core musculature to prevent the
lumbar spine from going into forced extension during the movement.
Drill action: The athlete raises the legs toward the partner’s
outstretched hands, and the partner briefly grasps the athlete’s
lower legs before forcefully pushing the athlete’s legs down toward
the ground. Before the legs reach the ground, the athlete
decelerates and ultimately stops the downward movement before
flexing the hips to return to the starting position to reset for the next
repetition. Immediately repeat the movement.
Note: Intensity may be increased by using greater force of the
downward push or by altering the direction of the push so that the
leg action is not purely in the sagittal plane.
COMMON ERRORS
Lowering the legs without waiting for the partner to
push them to the ground, reducing the eccentric load of
the exercise
Not controlling the lumbopelvic position and extending
the spine as the legs are lowered, increasing the
pressure on the lower back musculature
1395

KEY TERMS
active flat foot
amortization phase
ascending complex training
back squat equivalent strength
balance
ballistic exercise
bound
1396

box jump
complex training
concentric phase
contrast training
coupling phase
depth jump
descending sets
dynamic valgus
eccentric phase
foot contact
hop
jump
muscle spindle
negative foot speed
parallel elastic component (PEC)
plyometric exercise
potentiation
power
progressive overload
rebound exercise
series elastic component (SEC)
slam
stretch reflex
stretch reflex latency
stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
throw
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Stored elastic energy is used to increase force production
during which phase of plyometric exercises?
  a.  eccentric
  b.  isometric
  c.  amortization
  d.  concentric
1397
