CHAPTER 20
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR SPEED AND
AGILITY TRAINING
Thomas Dos’Santos, PhD, and Paul A. Jones,
PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Brad H.
DeWeese, Sophia Nimphius, and Steven S. Plisk to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
describe the underlying biomechanical constructs of sprint,
change-of-direction, maneuverability, and agility performance;
apply fundamental biomechanical movement principles to the
coaching of locomotion modes and techniques;
analyze the abilities and skills needed to perform specific
movement tasks;
effectively monitor the development of sprint, change-of-
direction, and agility abilities;
apply evidence-based methods for developing speed, change of
direction, and agility; and
design and implement training programs to maximize athletic
performance.
1398

This chapter addresses the development of speed, change-of-
direction, and agility abilities. Although the term speed is often used
when an athlete displays one or all of these aspects of physical
performance, it is critical to understand that athlete development
requires various underpinning physical capacities and skills as a
result of differing biomechanical requirements. These three
important aspects of physical performance can be defined as
follows:
Speed. The skills and abilities needed to achieve high
movement velocities
Change of direction. The skills and abilities needed to
explosively change movement direction, velocities, or modes
Agility. The skills and abilities needed to change direction,
velocity, or mode in response to a stimulus
The ability to outrun and maneuver the competition is a hallmark
of most athletic endeavors. Further, the ability to change direction
rapidly during an activity can mute the effect of an opponent’s speed
or provide both physical and tactical advantages on the field of play.
Although it may seem that these scenarios all involve the “speed” of
an athlete, this perceived speed may be a result of one quality or a
combination of the three qualities just listed. Within sport, high-
speed human locomotion can be categorized as linear or
multidirectional. Generating high speeds linearly, more commonly
referred to as sprinting, is the underlying requirement for success in
many track and field events as well as open-field running in game-
based contexts. While linear speed is important in team sports, play
is primarily multidirectional. As a result, these athletes’ success
partially depends on responding to ever-changing game scenarios
through fast, efficient changes of direction and decelerations,
whereas speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach maximal
velocity.
Because of the nature of most sports, there are scenarios in
which athletes have a predetermined change of direction to make
1399

and they are limited only by their physical capacity to perform this
activity (e.g., a route, play, or predetermined pattern). The physical
capacity 
to 
change 
direction 
while 
decelerating 
and 
then
reaccelerating, sometimes using a different mode of travel, is
change-of-direction (COD) ability, whereas agility requires the
use of perceptual-cognitive ability in combination with change-of-
direction ability. This highlights the similar and contrasting qualities
of speed, change of direction, and agility. For example,
acceleration is a part of change-of-direction ability and agility, but
additional aspects such as deceleration ability and mode of
movement differentiate the training for speed from the training for
change of direction and agility. The physical capacity to change
direction may be a component of agility (i.e., action capacity), but
the perceptual-cognitive component influences the physical demands
of agility. Therefore, while reading this chapter, one should
understand that although these qualities overlap some, differing
physical, technical, or perceptual-cognitive development is required
to improve each of these aspects of physical performance.
When athletes are sprinting or changing direction, their
performance is a function of physical capacity and technical
proficiency. While biomechanical and metabolic efficiency underpin
performance in aerobic sport, effective application of force (net
impulse) limits speed, change of direction, and agility. Simply put, an
athlete’s success in these explosive movements is the product of an
athlete’s strength capacity combined with the ability to use this
strength within the constraints of the activity. Strength is often
associated with an athlete’s capacity to produce force, but it is
important to understand that while high levels of maximal strength
are desirable attributes in sport, sprint, COD, and agility events occur
in periods that prevent athletes from producing and expressing their
maximal strength, thus the rate at which net forces are produced is
essential.
Within sprinting, the application of force allows the athlete to
accelerate, attain high velocities, and attempt to maintain the high
1400

velocities. In addition to the force application associated with
acceleration and attainment of velocity in sprinting, COD ability
requires effective application of force to decelerate, deflect the
center of mass, and then reaccelerate in another direction. Further
still, agility performance is considered a function of the athlete’s
ability not only to change direction but also specifically to change
direction in response to a stimulus (4) such as a defender or ball;
this is known as perception–action coupling. For this reason,
strength and conditioning professionals must be aware of their
training 
choices 
regarding 
the 
development 
of 
physical
characteristics that assist in promoting speed, COD, and agility on
both the track and the field.
Speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach
maximal velocity, whereas agility performance requires
the use of perceptual- cognitive ability in combination
with the ability to decelerate and then reaccelerate in an
intended direction.
1401

Speed and Agility Mechanics
To execute movement techniques, athletes must apply force—the
product of mass and acceleration. Due to the limited available time
to produce force during most athletic activities, two variables
describe force relative to the time available to produce force:
Rate of force development (RFD)—The development of
maximal force in minimal time, typically used as an indicator of
explosive strength (3).
Impulse—The product of the generated force and the time
required for its production, which is measured as the area
under the force–time curve. According to the impulse–
momentum 
relationship, 
net 
impulse 
dictates 
the
magnitude of change of momentum of an object. Because
mass remains constant in most sporting scenarios, increases in
net impulse are therefore proportionate to changes in velocity.
Physics of Sprinting, Change of Direction,
and Agility
Force represents the interaction of two physical objects. Force is a
vector quantity, meaning that it has both magnitude (size) and
direction. Traditionally, force is described as a push or a pull exerted
on one object by another, which prevents both objects from
occupying the same space. This movement of mass changes an
object’s velocity, causing acceleration.
Within the strength and conditioning profession, velocity and
speed are often used interchangeably. For a proper discussion on
sprint and agility performance, these terms need to be separated.
Speed is a scalar quantity, which means that it describes only how
fast an object is moving. Speed is the rate at which an object covers
a distance. Like force, velocity is a vector quantity. Velocity
describes both how fast an object is traveling and its direction. In
short, velocity is speed with a direction.
1402

Acceleration refers to the rate at which an object’s velocity
changes over time. Once a force acts on a physical object, the mass
will change direction and leave the space it was occupying.
Acceleration of the object will continue if external forces continue to
change velocity. In practical settings, deceleration replaces negative
acceleration in describing a change from higher to lower velocity.
Rate of Force Development
Within the sporting context, the ability to produce force rapidly is
arguably a more desirable trait than maximal force production given
the time constraints associated with most high-intensity actions
(100). While the ability to generate high levels of maximal force has
been shown to improve performance in jump height and other
athletic measures, most competitive scenarios do not occur within a
time frame that allows an athlete to generate maximal forces (27).
Specifically, the generation of maximal contraction force takes at
least 300 milliseconds, while many sport activities consume 0 to 200
milliseconds (figure 20.1) (1). For this reason, in sport settings
where success is restricted to timing of movement, RFD is a more
useful measure of an athlete’s impulsive ability (5). RFD can be
described as the change in force divided by the change in time
(100).
1403

FIGURE 20.1 Force as a function of time, indicating maximum strength, rate of force
development (RFD), and force at 0.2 seconds for untrained (solid blue line), heavy
resistance–trained (dashed yellow line), and explosive-ballistic–trained (dotted black line)
subjects. Impulse is the change in momentum resulting from a force, measured as the
product of force and time (represented by the area under each curve), and is increased by
improving RFD. When functional movements are performed, force is typically applied very
briefly—often for 0.1 to 0.2 seconds—whereas absolute maximum force development may
require 0.6 to 0.8 seconds.
Reprinted by permission from K. Häkkinen, M. Alen, and P.V. Komi, “Changes in Electrical and Mechanical Behavior of
Leg Extensor Muscle During Heavy Resistance Strength Training,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavic 125 (1985): 573-585;
and K. Häkkinen, P.V. Komi, and M. Alen, “Effect of Explosive Type Strength Training on Isometric Force- and
Relaxation Time, Electromyographic and Muscle Fibre Characteristics of Leg Extensor Muscles,” Acta Physiologica
Scandinavica 125 (1985): 587-600.
The ability to accelerate a mass depends on a change in velocity
resulting from the application of an external force. Therefore, from a
practical standpoint, an athlete wishing to achieve higher
acceleration capabilities should apply forces at a greater rate and
orient force in the optimal direction (84).
Impulse
For an object to change its position, forces must be applied (to
overcome inertia) to produce a change in velocity. Athletes
attempting to increase locomotor speeds through the production of
force never apply force instantaneously. In fact, force is applied to
1404

the running surface over a period of time (i.e., impulse) in the stance
phase of sprinting (figure 20.2) or in the plant phase of changing
direction. The length of time athletes are in this stance or plant
phase is termed their ground contact time. The product of the
time the force is applied to the ground and the amount of force
applied is termed impulse and can be graphically represented as the
area under a force–time curve. Changes in impulse result in changes
of the athlete’s momentum and therefore the ability to either
accelerate or decelerate, thus underpinning human locomotion.
FIGURE 20.2 Sprint ground reaction force and impulse during the (a) acceleration phase
and (b) maximal-velocity phase. Wb = body weight.
Figure 20.2 demonstrates how the vertical and horizontal forces
differ in magnitude when the acceleration phase (figure 20.7 on
page 645) is compared to the maximal-velocity phase (figure 20.8 on
page 646), which reflects the two different body positions used to
produce force through maximal extension. Further, these two
diagrams demonstrate the concept of impulse (represented as the
area under the force–time curve) during the braking phase,
indicated by a negative horizontal force, or during the propulsive
phase that occurs where there is a positive horizontal force. These
two phases of impulse are indicated by the vertical dotted line. It
1405

should be noted that during maximal-velocity phases, production of
force is asymmetrical and the RFD is very high, resulting in much
shorter ground contact times in comparison to the acceleration
phase.
Momentum is defined as the product between the mass of an
object and the velocity of movement. During a sprint, an athlete’s
body mass remains constant. Thus, given the same time frame, the
only way to achieve a greater impulse is to generate greater net
force. This increase in net impulse leads to an increase in
momentum or a decrease in momentum, depending on whether the
athlete is intending to accelerate or reaccelerate or decelerate before
a COD or as an isolated action. In other words, a change in impulse
results in a change in momentum and is the cause of an object’s
movement.
Within human locomotion, the magnitude of the force coupled
with the length of time the force is produced during an individual
step is paramount to success. Changes in these forces can increase
or decrease the athlete’s momentum. For this reason, training should
focus on developing impulse—the area under the force–time curve—
in addition to RFD.
Power has not been discussed here because it is derived from
force and velocity. Therefore, power is considered a mechanical
construct and, practically speaking, it can be more useful to directly
measure the characteristics that determine power production (e.g.,
force and velocity), because measurement of power alone does not
give insight into the performance in a way that is fully useful to
practitioners. In understanding that force, RFD, and impulse are
direct, underlying characteristics that dictate explosive performance,
one does not require a more complex derived value to gain
additional insight.
Practical Implications for Speed
To displace their body mass down a track or field, athletes must
produce forces sufficient to overcome the effects of gravity and
1406

create a positive change in velocity. Within a short sprint, force is the
effort needed to accelerate an athlete up to his or her highest
achievable speeds, which are largely determined by physiological
factors. These forces or efforts are produced rapidly, with time
constraints that are shorter than the time needed for maximal
voluntary force production. For this reason, rate of force production
may be a more important factor for sprinting success. Moreover,
since sprinting success is largely dependent on the production of
forces within a short amount of time, impulse is an important
underlying factor.
Practical Implications for Change of
Direction and Agility
In addition to the requirement for acceleration, the production of
braking forces over certain periods of time, or foot contacts, termed
braking impulse, should be considered during COD, deceleration,
and agility maneuvers. The amount of impulse required to change
momentum effectively and efficiently is a direct reflection of the
physical requirements for COD. For example, as the angle of
directional change required typically increases or the entry velocity
into the COD increases, so does the impulse required to change
momentum and deflect the center of mass; therefore, it is physically
more demanding to perform such activities. Further, the time
restraints placed on a performer due to the perceptual-cognitive
aspects of agility can influence the physical demands by limiting the
time available to produce the required force (and impulse) to
successfully change direction in response to a stimulus.
Speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach
maximal velocity, whereas agility performance requires
the use of perceptual-cognitive ability in combination
with the ability to decelerate, change direction, and
then reaccelerate in an intended direction.
1407

Neurophysiological Basis for Speed
Sprinting, agility, and COD are all dynamic displays of force
production in the athletic setting. Because strength and conditioning
professionals are often asked to assist in the development of these
competitively advantageous qualities, an overview of how these
force measures are produced during movement is warranted.
Nervous System
Neuromuscular function is vital to sprint performance because the
activity and the interaction of the central nervous system with the
muscles ultimately influence the rate and strength of muscle
contraction. Research has shown that the combination of strength,
plyometric, and sprint training produces several adaptations within
the neuromuscular system that may contribute to improved sprint
performance. Resistance training enhances neural drive, the rate and
amplitude of impulses being sent from the nervous system to the
target muscles (1). Increases in neural drive, which are indicative of
an increase in the rate at which action potentials occur, are related
to increases in both muscular force production and the rate of force
production. Similarly, plyometric training demonstrates increases in
excitability of high-threshold motor neurons. Increased excitability
ultimately enhances neural drive to the muscle. Taken together,
increases in neural drive may contribute to increases in the athlete’s
RFD and impulse generation.
Stretch-Shortening Cycle
Many functional tasks begin with preparatory countermovements
involving spring-like actions referred to as the stretch-shortening
cycle (SSC)—an eccentric–concentric coupling phenomenon in
which muscle–tendon complexes are rapidly and forcibly lengthened,
or stretch loaded, and immediately shortened in a reactive or elastic
manner, resulting in enhanced concentric force production.
Practically speaking, the SSC is demonstrated in movements in which
1408

a rapid transition from an eccentric action to a concentric action
occurs. Therefore, SSC actions are particularly prevalent in sports
involving running, jumping, directional changes, and other explosive
changes in velocity; thus reactive strength development is a highly
important quality to develop in training programs and can be a
distinct capability that is independent of maximal strength in elite
athletes (45, 55, 56, 82, 83, 91, 98, 112).
SSC actions exploit intrinsic muscle–tendon behavior as well as
the force and length reflex feedback to the nervous system (3, 4, 10,
18, 33). Acutely, SSC actions tend to increase mechanical efficiency
and impulse via elastic energy recovery, whereas chronically, they
upregulate muscle stiffness and enhance neuromuscular activation
(45, 55, 56, 82, 83).
Training activities aimed at improving SSC performance should
fulfill two criteria (47, 82, 83, 91, 98):
They should involve skillful, multijoint movements that
transmit forces through the kinetic chain and exploit elastic–
reflexive mechanisms.
To manage fatigue and emphasize work quality and technique,
they should be structured around brief work bouts or clusters
separated by frequent rest pauses.
In practice, a combination of progressive plyometric and heavy
resistance methods can accomplish these objectives (i.e., complex or
contrast training).
Spring–Mass Model
Exposure to strength and speed training may be linked to a rise in
the preactivation of the musculature used in sprinting (54, 56). The
onset of pre-tension may be related to an increase in the sensitivity
of associated muscle spindles. The improvement in the time needed
for feedback from muscle spindles results in greater muscle stiffness
and tendon compliance (54, 58, 79). This physiological condition
provides support to the SSC, which underpins the spring–mass
1409

model (SMM). The SMM (figure 20.3) is a mathematical model that
depicts sprinting as a type of human locomotion in which the
displacement of a body mass is the aftereffect from energy produced
and is delivered through the collective coiling and extension of
spring-like actions within muscle architecture (11, 29, 37, 39).
During a complete running cycle, one spring compresses and propels
the sprinter’s body forward. Simultaneously, the other spring swings
forward in preparation for ground contact.
FIGURE 20.3 A simple spring–mass model relative to the ground reaction force during
the stance phase of a sprint. During the stance phase, the model demonstrates how the leg
(represented as a spring) is uncompressed at initial contact and then is compressed
(represented by the change in length of the spring) during midstance or as vertical ground
reaction force increases.
Reprinted by permission from K.P. Clark and P.G. Weyand, “Are Running Speeds Maximized With Simple-Spring Stance
Mechanics?” Journal of Applied Physiology 117, no. 6 (2014): 605.
Within an upright sprint, compression of the spring begins at foot
strike, resulting in horizontal braking forces. This sudden and brief
deceleration assists in propelling the swing leg forward in
preparation for the subsequent step. As the center of mass moves
ahead of the foot, the sprinter is in midstance. Within the SMM, the
spring is compressed to the lowest point, which coincides with a
lowered center of mass at midstance. Finally, the model describes
1410

the push-off segment of the stance phase as the return of energy
through the extension of the coiled spring. This resultant energy and
return of force projects the sprinter forward.
While the SMM provides a conceptual framework for highlighting
the actions involved in upright high-speed running, recent
investigations suggest that the model’s ability to describe the stance
phase of elite sprinters is limited. As illustrated in figure 20.2 on
page 640, during the maximal-velocity phase, elite sprinters tend to
deviate from a classic SMM by producing much of their vertical force
in the first half of a ground contact. In contrast, most non-elite
sprinters, such as those involved in many team or field-based sports,
display stance phases that are described by the SMM (24), where
the vertical force curve is more symmetrical, as shown in figure 20.3.
As such, the SMM should be used as a means to describe the
relationship between the SSC, muscle stiffness, and sprinting. In
fact, as stride frequency increases at a given running speed, one of
the most important features of the leg spring is an increase in
muscle stiffness (39).
Because sprinting requires an athlete to move at high
speeds, strength and conditioning professionals should
emphasize the prescription of exercises that have been
shown to increase neural drive while overloading
musculature of the hip, knee, and ankle regions involved
in the SSC.
Additional Neurophysiological
Considerations for COD and Agility
Development
In addition to the neurophysiological aspects of speed performance
previously discussed, other factors must be considered regarding
COD and agility performance. During the plant phase, depicted in
figure 20.4, the length of ground contact time of either an agility
1411

(0.23-0.25 s) (7) or a COD movement (~0.15-0.6 s dependent on
angle) (8, 49, 64, 36) exceeds the typical ground contact time of
both the acceleration phase of sprinting (0.17-0.2 s) (4) and the
maximal-velocity phase of sprinting (0.09-0.11 s) (104, 105). In the
context of COD, as the intended angle of direction change (i.e.,
deflection of center of mass) increases, the ground contact time of
the main execution plant foot typically increases, attributed to the
greater braking force, negative work (i.e., knee flexion), and
deceleration demands associated when having to reduce momentum
with sharper directional changes (36). As a result, this prolongs the
contact time to increase braking impulse to reduce momentum along
the original direction followed by propulsive impulse to enable
acceleration toward the new intended direction of travel. In view of
this, COD actions <45 degrees generally can be considered fast SSC
activities, whereas direction changes >45 degrees generally can be
considered slower SSC activities, though this depends on entry
velocity and an athlete’s physical capacity (36).
1412

FIGURE 20.4 Plant phase, termed stance phase in the context of sprinting, of a COD
movement. This is the point in a COD movement that represents the transition between the
deceleration step and the acceleration step and is the main step in achieving deflection of
the center of mass. Body positioning and the ability to maintain strong trunk positions
during the deceleration of momentum and reorientation of the body to run in a new
direction are critical for performance.
Since effective braking is an important part of agility performance
(83, 84), neuromuscular development with respect to high-velocity
and high-force eccentric muscle actions should be considered, for
two reasons. First, the adaptations or motor unit recruitment
pathways called on during an eccentric muscle action are different
than those called on during concentric contractions (38). Secondly,
the adaptations to eccentric training appear to be specific to the
velocity of eccentric loading (74). In addition, training athletes for
effective agility performance requires knowledge of perceptual-
cognitive 
demands 
over 
and 
above 
the 
neurophysiological
requirements for changing direction. Not only are the perceptual-
cognitive demands on athletes related to their abilities in the areas
of visual search scanning, anticipation, decision making, and reaction
1413

time (87) but also the tactical situation (offensive vs. defensive)
changes the brain processing strategy required (93, 96).
The training required to improve agility becomes clearer as one
begins to understand the various demands required for COD and
agility with respect to neurophysiological factors, including the SSC,
eccentric muscle action neuromuscular training, and implications of
the length of time or the demand of the COD maneuver on the SMM.
Further, neurophysiological requirements of agility performance
extend beyond physical requirements to perceptual-cognitive
requirements that are specific to the tactical situation.
1414

Running Speed
Sprinting is a series of coupled flight and support phases, known as
strides (e.g., right foot contact to next right foot contact, essentially
comprised of two steps—right to left, left to right), orchestrated in
an attempt to displace the athlete’s body down the track at maximal
acceleration or velocity (or both), usually over brief distances and
durations. Sprinting has been described as rapid, unpaced, maximal-
effort running of 15 seconds or less (78). However, the classic
definition of sprint speed concerns the relationship between step
length (distance between the toe and heel of two consecutive
footsteps) and step frequency (or rate; number of steps per
second) (63). For clarity, one stride is equal to two steps (right to
left, then left to right).
Based on this understanding, sprint speed can be increased by an
increase in step length or an increase in step frequency (figure
20.5). Although these changes in performance variables are logical,
the underlying component to maximizing step length and step
frequency is related to rapid force production.
FIGURE 20.5 Step length–frequency interaction as a function of running velocity.
Adapted from Dillman (1975).
1415

The differences between elite and novice sprinters can be traced
to a single component. Much of the current literature on sprinting
(17, 105, 106) suggests that the amount of vertical force applied to
the ground during the stance phase at top speed may be the most
critical component to improving top speed. In addition, these greater
forces must be applied to the ground in the shortest period possible.
Application of force is needed to displace a mass. In sprinting,
step length represents the displacement of mass. Elite male sprinters
achieve a step length of 2.70 m (8.9 ft), whereas novice sprinters
display a step length of 2.56 m (8.4 ft) at maximum velocity (figure
20.6a) (62).
Since contact with the ground is needed to continue force
production and subsequent alterations in velocity, increasing the step
frequency theoretically would maximize the time available to produce
force. Elite male sprinters demonstrate step frequency near 4.63
steps per second compared to novice sprinters, who produce a
lesser step frequency of 4.43 steps per second (figure 20.6b) (62).
In other words, elite sprinters need less ground contact time with
each step to exert the effort needed to displace their mass due to
their ability to create greater impulses. Thus, these faster sprinters
also spend more time in the air. Interestingly, elite sprinters display
times to reposition the swing leg that are similar to those of their
slower counterparts (62, 106).
1416

FIGURE 20.6 Step length (a) and step rate (b) in sprinters with varying qualifications.
Data from Mann (2011).
Although the time required for staging the subsequent ground
contact is similar between elite and novice sprinters, elite sprinters
are able to propel themselves farther down the track due to properly
directed vertical forces. Mann (62) suggests that these vertical forces
are better directed toward the track due to an optimized knee height
at maximal flexion of the recovering leg. This higher knee position
provides a greater time period for force production and subsequent
ground clearance (i.e., range of motion force movement principle).
This technical advantage may be further evidence for why elite
sprinters tend to produce most of their force within the first half of
the stance phase.
Additionally, faster sprinters are able to achieve higher velocities
through the continuous application of high forces in a short stance
phase, which results in longer steps or steps occurring at a higher
rate. Within the elite setting (e.g., 100 m world championship
finalists), this results in male sprinters achieving velocities between
11.0 meters per second and 12.5 meters per second (24.6-28.0
mph) (46). Conversely, team sport athletes generally achieve
maximum velocities of approximately 8.0 to 9.5 meters per second
(17.9-21.3 mph) (25). While force production is arguably the limiting
1417

factor, technical efficiency and properly designed training also limit
sprint speed.
Sprint speed is determined by an athlete’s step length
and step frequency; more successful sprinters tend to
have longer step lengths as a result of properly directed
forces into the ground while also demonstrating a more
frequent step rate. These findings suggest that RFD and
proper biomechanics are two of the primary limiting
factors influencing sprint performance.
Sprinting Technique Guidelines
Linear sprinting is composed of a series of subtasks that can be
divided into the start, acceleration (figure 20.7), and top speed
(figure 20.8). While these phases of a sprint are technically distinct,
they all require the athlete to volitionally move the lower limbs at
maximal speeds through a series of stance and flight phases. The
stance phase can be broken down further into a braking period
followed by a propulsive period. In contrast, the flight phase consists
of the recovery and ground preparation (i.e., late swing)
segments of the swing leg.
1418

FIGURE 20.7 Sprinting technique during the initial acceleration (i.e., the start) and the
acceleration, touchdown, midstance, and takeoff of subsequent steps.
1419

FIGURE 20.8 Sprinting technique at maximum velocity includes the toe-off, maximal
vertical projection (MVP), touchdown/midstance, and subsequent toe-off phases.
Figure 20.9 is a sprint technique checklist that accompanies
figures 20.7 and 20.8. These recommendations are based on linear
sprinting and may be useful for both instruction and evaluation of
1420

the movements. Figure 20.10 on page 649 describes the
fundamental movements occurring in maximum-velocity sprinting.
Technical Errors and Coaching
Table 20.1 highlights many common sprinting errors as well as
possible causes and coaching corrections. Quite often, these errors
are the result of the misapplication of forces due to improper
coaching cues, insufficient mobility, or disruption to an athlete’s
normal gait caused by external interference. For instance, an athlete
may demonstrate overstriding due to a coaching drill (such as
reaching to successively longer marks along the track to gain speed)
or the belief that acutely increasing step length will allow one to
catch up to a competitor in a race. Regardless of the reason, the aim
of strength and conditioning professionals should be to promote an
athlete’s speed through the proper transmission of forces into the
ground that will optimize the athlete’s gait cycle.
Figure 20.9  Sprinting technique checklist: start,
acceleration, and maximum velocity.
Start
The athlete should attempt to distribute a balanced body weight through a
set position (blocks, three- or four-point staggered start) that uses segment
angles critical to produce forces necessary to deliver explosive forces from
the start.
Front lower leg angle should be approximately 90 degrees.
Rear lower leg angle should be approximately 120 to 135 degrees.
Aggressive extension of the hip, knee, and ankle of the front leg against the
block or ground should be observed.
After initially extending at the hip and knee, the rear leg should then
be rapidly flexed at the hip (to ~90 degrees), knee (to ~90 degrees),
and ankle (to neutral position) in preparation for foot contact of the
first step.
As the rear leg is driven forward, the opposite arm should also drive
forward, mirroring the range of motion and timing of the rear leg. The
range of motion at the shoulder of each arm is large.
1421

The head should be neutral, looking a few yards or meters ahead along the
track.
Acceleration
Posture
Forward inclination helps maximize propulsive force contribution and
depends on the absolute magnitude of force available. The forward lean
gradually reduces with each step, assuming an upright position by maximum
velocity.
The pelvis position should be neutral relative to torso.
The center of mass should be ahead of the foot during early acceleration
(first few steps), which gradually progresses to the center of mass being
slightly behind the foot as the athlete progresses to maximum velocity.
The center of mass and hip position begin low and rise higher with each
step from early to late acceleration to maximum velocity.
Arms
The ranges of motion in the arms are wide to match the ranges of motion in
the lower body on the contralateral side (e.g., as the knee travels forward,
the opposite arm travels forward).
The arms are driven aggressively backward.
Legs
During acceleration each step gets progressively longer, with ground contact
times getting shorter and flight times longer as the athlete advances to
maximum velocity.
Rapid, large split of the thighs through the stance phase enhances leg
extension force while preparing the swing limb for rapid acceleration back
down to the ground, enabling high ground reaction forces (GRF) early
during ground contact.
Low heel recovery enables shorter steps and more cycle time dedicated to
force production. Heel recovery gains more height as the athlete progresses
to maximum velocity.
The path of the heel and rest of the foot tends to be piston like (backward
and downward) before progressing to a more cyclic action by maximum
velocity.
Forward-oriented shin angles gradually become more vertical as the athlete
progresses to maximum velocity.
There should be rapid deceleration of extending the thigh (back-side catch)
during the late stance to avoid prolonging ground contact and then enable
rapid subsequent recovery of the leg after takeoff.
1422

The thigh forcefully retracts during the late swing to enable foot contact
behind the center of mass, enhancing production and direction (more
horizontal) of GRFs early in ground contact.
The foot and ankle maintain optimal stiffness. A stable foot position during
the early stance helps provide the foundation for the hip extensors to
contribute more effectively to forward propulsion while enabling storage and
release of elastic energy at the ankle.
Maximum Velocity
Posture
Slight forward lean
Head in neutral position looking toward intended direction of travel
High neutral pelvis position
Arms
Arm action mirrors the contralateral limb (i.e., when the touchdown leg is in
its longest position the opposite arm will be in its most open position to
balance the body).
The hand is driven hard down below the waist on the downstroke and
returns to the height of the athlete’s chin with a more acute angle at the
elbow (approximately 90 degrees on the return).
Arms should not cross the midline of the body.
Legs
With a slight flex of the knee at takeoff, the hip is in a hyperextended
position and the ankle is plantar flexed.
After toe-off, the knee should flex and the ankle dorsiflex (passive folding)
as the thigh flexes forward at the hip to a high knee position. A high heel
recovery whereby the foot steps over the opposite knee should be observed.
With the knee at its highest point (front-side catch), the tibia should be in a
high forward position, providing space for rearward acceleration of the thigh
to help generate larger initial GRFs during support.
The foot should travel down and back (negative foot speed before
touchdown).
The foot should touch down close to underneath the center of mass (will be
slightly in front). At touchdown the opposite knee should be beside or
slightly in front of the knee of the touchdown leg.
During support, knee and ankle flexion should be minimal.
In the late stance (back-side catch), early hip flexor activation helps avoid
prolonged ground contact and decelerates the extending limb, preventing
lower leg recovery behind the body after toe-off (too much back-side
1423

mechanics), providing more optimal leg recovery (better timing and
improved front side position).
Efficient rapid switching of limb positions requires efficient timing, enabled
by rapid switching off of key muscles; thus, relaxation and rhythm are
essential to enable optimal timing and coordination and reduce energy
demands.
Adapted from Mann (2011).
Training Goals
The overarching goal of sprinting is to achieve optimal step length
and step frequency through the correct application of force into the
ground. The transmission of high forces must occur within a short
stance phase, also known as ground contact time. During the
acceleration phase, propulsive forces assist in elevating the hips
above the ground to a point at which speed is no longer increasing
at large rates. This portion of the sprint, known as maximum
velocity, uses the SSC (through stiffness regulation) to propel the
athlete’s center of mass down the track horizontally.
Figure 20.10  Fundamental movements occurring in
maximum-velocity sprinting.
Early Flight
Eccentric hip flexion. Decelerates backward rotation of the thigh
Eccentric knee extension. Decelerates backward rotation of the leg and foot
Eccentric ankle dorsiflexion. Decelerates ankle plantar flexion
Midflight
Concentric hip flexion. Accelerates thigh forward
Eccentric knee extension followed by eccentric knee flexion
Concentric ankle dorsiflexion. Assists in reducing the limbs’ moment of
inertia
Late Flight
Concentric hip extension. Rotates the thigh backward in preparation for foot
contact
1424

Eccentric knee flexion. Accelerates the leg backward, limiting knee
extension; stops before foot strike (aided by concentric knee flexion to
minimize braking at touchdown)
Ankle in neutral position (avoid plantar flexed position). Preparation for
ground contact to reduce Achilles’ tendon complex slack at touchdown to
optimize storage of elastic energy during early support
Early Support
Continued concentric hip extension. Minimizes the braking effect of the foot
strike
Brief concentric knee flexion followed by eccentric knee extension. Absorbs
the landing and facilitates power transfer from the hip to the ankle during
propulsion
Eccentric plantar flexion. Stores potential elastic energy for subsequent
release to facilitate greater propulsion during late support
Late Support
Eccentric hip flexion. Decelerates backward thigh rotation; rotates the trunk
in preparation for forward takeoff
Concentric knee extension. Propels the center of gravity forward
Concentric plantar flexion. Aids in propulsion
Based on Bezodis et al. (2008); Putnam and Kozey (1989); Wood (1987).
TABLE 20.1 Common Sprinting Technique Errors,
Causes, and Corrections
Error
Cause
Coaching recommendations
START AND ACCELERATION
Hips are too high in
start of crouch position.
Misunderstanding
of setup
Instruct athlete to space feet by 1.5 to 2
foot lengths, then lower into starting
position by dropping the shin of the back
leg to be parallel with sprint surface.
The athlete is stepping
out laterally during the
initial drive phase.
Improper
distribution of
forces
Instruct the athlete to push or drive
through the ground to initiate the sprint.
*See sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683.
1425

Error
Cause
Coaching recommendations
The athlete’s arm
movement is
abnormally short and
tight.
Misunderstanding
of natural arm
swing
Instruct the athlete to either (a) drive the
elbow down and back or (b) pull the hands
down and back to simulate pulling on a
rope. In addition, cue the athlete to allow
the hands to fully break the waist while also
allowing the arms to recover at midline of
the body (invisible line from nose through
navel).
The athlete is holding
unnecessary tension in
dorsal muscles and
hyperextending the
neck.
Misunderstanding
of movement
Instruct the athlete to keep the head in line
with the spine; the torso and head should
rise at the same rate during the
acceleration and transition phases of the
sprint.
The athlete jumps the
first step or steps over
the knee of the stance
leg.
Push-off angle too
high; upward
thrust too steep
Instruct the athlete to initiate movement by
driving through the ground and allow the
swing leg to horizontally cut the stance leg
shin (i.e., ankle crossover), rather than
stepping over the stance leg (i.e., knee
crossover). In addition, cue the athlete to
keep the foot of the swing leg close to the
ground to set up a proper acceleration
phase.
The athlete gets into an
upright posture
prematurely.
Inadequate push-
off force; improper
carriage of head
Instruct the athlete to continue pushing
into the ground while maintaining a natural
trunk lean. Also cue the athlete to keep the
head in line with the spine; lifting the head
may result in a sudden lifting of the torso,
ultimately minimizing acceleration patterns.
MAXIMUM VELOCITY
The athlete is
superficially attempting
to maintain an
acceleration phase
when the shins are
clearly vertical.
Improper
understanding of
movement
patterns
Instruct the athlete that as the shins and
hips come up to vertical, so should the
torso and head. Encourage the athlete to
feel for the rise in the hips so that the joints
(shoulders to hips to ankles) stay stacked
or in line. This position allows for the
proper transmission of forces into the
running surface.
*See sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683.
1426

Error
Cause
Coaching recommendations
The athlete is not
displaying optimal
front-side mechanics
with regard to the
height of the swing leg
knee.
Inadequate force
production and hip
mobility
Recall that the swing leg’s knee height
(traditionally called front-side mechanics) is
influenced by GRFs and hip mobility.
Improperly cueing an athlete to lift the
knees may result in further improper
transmission of forces and ultimately
change the musculature naturally used
during the sprint event.
The athlete is
overstriding.
Misunderstanding
of force application
Success in sprint events results from the
ability to produce high vertical forces in a
short amount of time. An overstriding
athlete is attempting to increase speed via
larger ground contact times, which
ultimately dampens the effects of the
stretch-shortening cycle and lowers step
frequency. Instruct athletes to run in their
lane and maintain their natural gait cycle.
The athlete is
displaying chronic
hamstring injury or
pain.
Insufficient
mobility; improper
positioning of
pelvis
A high likelihood of hamstring injury occurs
during the sprint event’s swing phase due
to eccentric (lengthening) forces or
overstriding. An athlete is further
compromised when displaying anterior
pelvic tilt during the sprint event. Reduce
anterior pelvic tilt with appropriate
development of back-side and front-side
mechanics through appropriate sprint
drills.*
The athlete is
attempting to cycle the
leg action, resulting in
an increased time to
complete the swing
phase. This is made
apparent by the open
gap between the knees
during the stance
phase.
Improper force
application
Instruct the athlete to drive the foot down
and back into the track, not paw. Due to
the seemingly horizontal movement of the
foot during a sprint, coaches often miscue
athletes to paw the foot into the track.
Pawing the foot horizontally against the
track prevents the athlete from using
vertical forces, overloading the stretch-
shortening cycle to move down the track.
Integration of appropriate sprint drills*
should help develop the correct leg action.
The athlete is
displaying erroneous
Improper
understanding of
While traditionally coaches would claim that
erratic arm movement is a symptom of
*See sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683.
1427

Error
Cause
Coaching recommendations
arm movement in the
transverse plane.
movement pattern
fatigue, much literature suggests that
speed is limited by mechanical force
application, not metabolic efficiency.
Therefore, athletes should emphasize
driving the arms down and back while
maintaining an upright torso. In addition,
strength and conditioning professionals
should recommend to the athlete that the
arm swing recovers near the midline of the
body to take advantage of the
glenohumeral joint’s natural range of
motion.
*See sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683.
The 
following 
fundamental 
training 
objectives 
regarding
performance enhancement and injury prevention should be
considered during the development of speed in practical settings:
Emphasize brief ground support times as a means of achieving
rapid step rate. As previously mentioned, this requires high
levels of ballistic strength. This quality is developed
systematically through consistent exposure to speed training
as well as properly designed resistance training programs.
Emphasize the further development of the SSC as a means to
increase the amplitude of impulse for each step of the sprint.
Specifically, high achievers at top-speed sprinting produce high
forces in a shorter stance phase using the SSC. The complete
weightlifting movements and their derivatives are key
exercises for overloading the SSC with forces greater than
those produced during an open sprint, in addition to
plyometric training, which can induce high-impact stretch
loads to enhance SSC function and reactive strength.
Because sprinting requires an athlete to move at high
speeds, strength and conditioning professionals should
emphasize the prescription of exercises that span the
1428

load–velocity curve while overloading musculature of
the hip, knee, and ankle regions involved in the SSC.
1429

Methods of Developing Speed
From a practical standpoint, the demonstration of maximal speed is
the result of well-organized programming that organically develops
and matures the required skill sets within the athlete. This organic
approach to sprint training results from a schema of development
that is based on the emphasis and de-emphasis of certain qualities,
such as acceleration and maximum velocity, within each training
phase. Furthermore, the training plan should coordinate these
singular qualities through phasic progression. A well-constructed
training plan highlights specific components that will assist in fully
maximizing an athlete’s movement potential.
Sprinting
Although a variety of training stimuli are important for the
optimization of athletic performance, it can be argued that no
exercise improves running velocity more than maximum-velocity
sprinting (i.e., primary methods). An athlete’s sprint prowess
depends on the generation of high forces in short time periods (62,
105). Neurological adaptations resulting from long-term training
plans that emphasize maximal strength and movement velocity
improve both RFD and impulse generation (1, 100). In the strength
and conditioning setting, weightlifting movements and jump training
are prescribed to develop RFD and impulse at varying loads, because
these movements use the SSC (i.e., tertiary methods). Similarly,
upright sprinting uses the SSC, defining it as a plyometric
movement. Chronic exposure to movements eliciting the SSC can
increase muscle stiffness, which is a potential physiological
advantage for sprint ability (39).
In addition, sprinting requires near-maximum to maximum muscle
activation, which depends on high central nervous system activity.
Therefore, chronic exposure to sprinting may lead to improvements
in musculoskeletal control via the central nervous system. This would
result 
in 
a 
cyclical 
dose–response 
relationship, 
because
1430

neurophysiological adaptations from previous practices would bolster
subsequent training. In an effort to either enhance the force
required or target potential neuromuscular adaptations for sprinting
improvement, resisted and assisted sprint training techniques are
often employed (i.e., secondary methods). The proposed benefits,
potential drawbacks, and coaching considerations are outlined in
table 20.2.
Strength
As noted throughout the chapter, sprint speed is underpinned by an
athlete’s ability to produce large forces within brief time periods.
These forces must be large enough to support the body weight in
the presence of gravity and displace the body through an increase in
velocity (62). Thus, many strength and conditioning professionals
are aware of the importance of resistance training in the
development of a sprint-based athlete. Central to the discussion of
resistance training is how best to transfer newly developed strength
qualities from the weight room to the track or field (109). The
transfer of strength improvements to sprinting may require an
emphasis 
on 
the 
specificity 
of 
training 
(i.e., 
dynamic
correspondence and coordinative overload). This transfer of
training effect deals with the degree of performance adaptation and
may result from the similarities between the movement patterns,
peak force, RFD, acceleration, and velocity patterns of an exercise
and the sporting environment (98).
While training for maximal strength may be beneficial, training
should emphasize agendas that merge maximal strength and speed–
strength qualities instead (44). The selection of exercises and
movements that provide opportunities to display forces and
velocities like those found in sprinting may have the most benefit
with regard to enhancing rate coding and firing frequency, alongside
alterations to type II muscle fibers such as cross-sectional area and
fascicle length (40, 43). For instance, evidence suggests that
weightlifting movements and their derivatives such as the clean,
1431

snatch, and mid-thigh pulls may enhance sprint performance
through physiological adaptations such as muscular stiffness,
enhanced RFD, and coactivation of the musculature surrounding the
hips and knees (6, 26, 32).
Mobility
While not a kinetic variable, soft tissue manipulation is a commonly
used practice in the development of speed athletes. Strength and
conditioning professionals and athletic trainers rely on tools such as
stretching, chiropractic care, massage, and myofascial release to
achieve optimal mobility within the dynamic state. Mobility is the
freedom of an athlete’s limb to move through a desired range of
motion, whereas flexibility is a joint’s total range of motion. With an
understanding that positional characteristics are among several
limiting 
factors 
in 
performance, 
strength 
and 
conditioning
professionals should ensure that proper postural integrity is in place
before the onset of practice or competition.
TABLE 20.2 Assistance and Resistance Training for
Speed Development
Type of
training
Example
exercise
modalities
Potential
benefits
Potential
disadvantages
Practical use
suggestions
Note: SSC = stretch-shortening cycle.
1432

Type of
training
Example
exercise
modalities
Potential
benefits
Potential
disadvantages
Practical use
suggestions
Assistance
training
(e.g.,
overspeed
training)
Inclusive of
modalities
such as rope
towing,
bungee cord
pulls, or
downhill
running with
the intention
of allowing
the athlete to
run at
supramaximal
speeds
Theoretically,
these training
tools are used
to potentially
expose the
athlete to
higher
velocities than
one can
achieve in
unassisted
sprinting by
inducing an
increased step
or stride rate
and exposing
the athlete to
higher hip
angular
velocities (46).
This increased
step rate is
hypothesized
to have
potential for
neuromuscular
adaptations to
increase
maximal sprint
velocity.
Increases in
overspeed
should be
limited to
≤10%.
Assisted sprinting
may prematurely
rush an athlete’s
stance phase,
thus removing
time needed to
exert optimal
forces, and has
been shown to
result in
decreased muscle
activation and
propulsive force
production in
comparison to
maximal running
(66). Therefore,
what can be
described as
chop steps may
be observed.
Undesirable
techniques such
as leaning back
and overstriding
may be present
in a protective
manner to brake,
which is
suboptimal.
Exercises that
rely on the
towing of
athletes may
increase braking
forces in
comparison to
maximal running
(66) as athletes
attempt to
Top-speed
sprinting should
be developed
through more
natural and
safer training
tools that
consider an
athlete’s training
status and
support optimal
biomechanics.
Strength and
conditioning
professionals
should carefully
assess the
implications of
assistance
modalities
before
implementation
and these
modalities may
be best used
when working
with advanced
or elite athletes.
Note: SSC = stretch-shortening cycle.
1433

Type of
training
Example
exercise
modalities
Potential
benefits
Potential
disadvantages
Practical use
suggestions
tolerate velocities
they cannot
naturally create
or accommodate
because of
biomechanical
efficiency,
training state, or
both.
Downhill sprinting
may expose the
athlete to
unnecessary
eccentric forces
through a
modified stance
leg that results
from having to
find the ground.
This may also
affect the SSC,
which is
optimized
through the foot
placement
occurring just in
front of the
center of mass
on ground
contact in flat-
surface upright
sprinting (66).
To date, very
little research
supports the
implementation
of overspeed
training, because
sprint success
results from an
Note: SSC = stretch-shortening cycle.
1434

Type of
training
Example
exercise
modalities
Potential
benefits
Potential
disadvantages
Practical use
suggestions
athlete’s ability to
produce large
forces in a short
ground contact
time.
Resistance
sprinting
Inclusive of
training
modalities
such as sled
towing, sled
pushing, wind
resistance,
incline
sprinting, and
sled pushing
with the
intention of
improving an
athlete’s
accelerative
abilities
Accentuates
the
biomechanics
of the
acceleration
phase by
placing the
athlete in a
position that
promotes
lowered torso
(i.e., forward
trunk lean),
hips, and shin
angles.
Resisted
sprinting may
optimize an
athlete’s ability
to cover short
distances
quickly by
overloading the
acceleration
phase,
resulting in
ground contact
times that
produce higher
propulsive
forces.
Improving
acceleration,
which is a
change in
Sprint efforts
against a load
that is too great
may lead to
longer ground
contact times in
addition to
shorter step
lengths that are
not task specific
(59).
Slopes of incline
that are too great
may modify
proper sprinting
biomechanics,
resulting in a
rehearsal of
improper
technique and
thus limiting
transfer of
training effect.
Sled pushing may
alter the natural
sprinting gait
cycle due to the
removal of arm
action that
synchronizes and
counterbalances
the leg action
occurring at the
hip.
Strength and
conditioning
professionals
and athletes
attempting to
improve the
acceleration
phase of a sprint
may adopt
resistance
training
modalities that
maintain normal
biomechanics
involved in
unresisted
sprints.
Loads should be
chosen based on
the sporting
context while
also considering
the athlete’s
physical status.
For instance,
track and field
sprinters may
use loads that
do not decrease
running velocity
by more than
10% to 12% (2,
49, 52, 61).
In contrast, field
sport athletes
Note: SSC = stretch-shortening cycle.
1435

Type of
training
Example
exercise
modalities
Potential
benefits
Potential
disadvantages
Practical use
suggestions
velocity, may
lead to an
increase in top
speed through
enhanced RFD.
Resisted sprints
and loads, and
velocity
decrements,
can be
manipulated to
target
technical,
speed–
strength,
power, and
strength–speed
qualities (19,
20).
It may offer
specificity to
sporting
scenarios when
athletes need
to push (move)
external mass
such as in
bobsled, rugby,
and American
football.
who overcome
external
resistance while
blocking,
tackling, and
scrimmaging
can use loads
20% to 30% of
body weight to
improve the
initial 5-10 m of
movement (28,
52). Frictional
properties will
influence the
amount of
resistance
experienced,
thus prescribing
sled pushes and
pulls based on
velocity
decrements is
suggested (19,
20).
Note: SSC = stretch-shortening cycle.
Based on the previously described constructs of speed, the
currently accepted model of sprint success is based on the athlete’s
ability to produce and overcome ground reaction forces in a short
amount of time. Moreover, while these GRFs assist in producing
optimal step length through forward propulsion, the sprinter’s
position in flight may be limited by insufficient mobility (i.e., reduced
hip flexion restricts subsequent thigh and knee lift). Specifically, an
1436

athlete may possess the physical characteristics necessary to yield
high rates of force in a short amount of time, but compromises in a
joint’s freedom of movement will result in misplaced forces. The
improper placement of forces due to erroneous ground contact will
result in dampened sprint speed and an increased likelihood for
injury.
1437

Agility Performance and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In both field and court sports, there is a substantial number of
preplanned COD movements as well as changes in direction in
response to the ball, the game, teammates, or opponents. In sports
such as baseball, softball, American football, and basketball, athletes
decide before commencement of movement on the path they will
run. Such patterns often including a quick or sudden COD—for
example, exploding into a sprint out of a shuffle off a base or
running a route before receipt of a ball. However, many sports also
include rapid COD in response to teammates, opponents, or tactical
situations (i.e., external stimuli). Such responses can occur in an
offensive or a defensive scenario, and the physical movement and
perceptual-cognitive aspects of such performances impose different
demands on the athlete. Therefore, one should thoroughly
understand the factors associated with agility performance from a
physical standpoint (COD ability) and in combination with the
perceptual-cognitive aspects (agility).
Athletes improve COD ability through development of
several physical factors and technical skills during a
variety of speeds and modes of movement. The
development 
of 
agility 
also 
requires 
improving
perceptual-cognitive abilities in relation to the demands
of the sport.
Factors Affecting Change of Direction and
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
It is becoming increasingly clear that the ground contact time and
GRF during the plant phase (figure 20.4 on page 643) of a
movement provide valuable insight into the physical factors that
affect COD performance, while perceptual-cognitive factors must
1438

also be considered regarding agility. COD and agility movements
performed at shallow cutting angles (less than 75 degrees) and
associated with shorter ground contact times (less than 250 ms)
(94) benefit from training similar to speed training with regard to the
physical demands but still require additional perceptual-cognitive
training. On the other hand, when a COD involves a more aggressive
cutting angle (equal to or greater than 75 degrees), the length of
ground contact time can often exceed 250 milliseconds (8, 48, 64,
36) due to the greater braking requirements. Therefore, one should
consider increasing emphasis on eccentric strength for braking and
maximal strength alongside the concentric impulsiveness required
for propulsion during the reacceleration. Additionally, due to the
eccentric–concentric coupling during the plant phase of directional
changes, reactive strength development is also a key training priority
(36). Figure 20.11 provides an example of how various requirements
(angle of COD or perceptual-cognitive requirement of agility) may
affect the GRF and ground contact times of athletes. Of particular
interest is the effect of various methods of changing direction (for
the same angle of direction change) on GRF and ground contact
times. The effect of method of changing direction can be seen in
figure 20.11: The 5-0-5 was performed either with a single-leg COD
(outside leg turn) or with a jump turn that can be performed in a
testing environment but is not commonly performed on the field of
play. Nevertheless, this demonstrates that the technique chosen
dictates the demands; therefore, if trying to elicit a specific
adaptation from an athlete, one should provide specific instructions.
1439

FIGURE 20.11 Comparison of ground reaction force and contact times during various
change-of- direction and agility maneuvers.
The test used for assessment of agility performance has an
impact on perceived agility ability of the athlete. A plethora of tests
are used to assess “agility,” but tests without a reactive aspect
should be considered COD tests, and a test that includes a reactive
stimulus is now by definition a test of agility for most sports. Further,
the requirements of the test may result in assessment of factors
other than COD ability or perceptual-cognitive requirements.
Therefore, one must be informed about and critical regarding a test
used to assess “agility” or “change-of-direction ability.” For example,
if the Illinois agility test, often performed with soccer athletes (91),
was used after preseason training, improvements in performance
may be due to improved metabolic capacity and not necessarily
improved COD ability. This is attributed to the length of the Illinois
test, which imposes a higher metabolic demand than shorter tests
and thus is more representative of maneuverability.
However, it should be noted that even similar-length tests such as
the traditional 5-0-5 test, the modified 5-0-5 test (the 5-0-5 without
the initial 10 m run-up), and the L-run used on the same athletes
1440

have only a moderate relationship (41), indicating they are not all
assessing the same type of COD ability or the same underpinning
physical requirements. This becomes more apparent when one
realizes that some tests require a rapid COD while others require
multiple COD. Tests with multiple COD often require more bending
around an object or cone while maintaining as much velocity as
possible, in comparison to a sharp COD that demands a rapid
deceleration (e.g., 5-0-5 test). Therefore, tests such as the Illinois
agility or L-run that require a bend to maintain velocity instead of an
aggressive COD could be considered tests of maneuverability (69).
With this said, table 20.3 gives examples of COD and agility tests
and drills that address different physical requirements within the
realm of “agility.” One should consider the aspect most important to
the given sport when determining COD and agility abilities and
consider testing and monitoring various types of COD abilities and
perceptual-cognitive abilities required during true agility tests.
Furthermore, tests such as the traditional 5-0-5 may be influenced
by an athlete’s linear running speed (70, 81); thus, to isolate COD
ability, the COD deficit (5-0-5 test time—10 m linear sprint time)
could be determined (70, 71). Practitioners may also want to
consider an athlete’s sprint momentum (average velocity during a
linear sprint test or 10 m approach of the traditional 5-0-5 test ×
athlete’s mass) to provide an indication of the braking demand
experienced by athletes during the 5-0-5 test to give a more
complete view of the athlete’s COD ability.
TABLE 20.3 Aspects of Agility Tested or Trained in
Various Drills and Tests
Change-of-
direction
speed
Maneuverability
Perceptual-
cognitive
ability
Metabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
1441

Change-of-
direction
speed
Maneuverability
Perceptual-
cognitive
ability
Metabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
TESTS
Reactive
agility tests
✓
✓
<3 s
5-0-5
✓
<3 s
5-10-5
✓
<5 s
T-test
✓
✓
<12 sa
Illinois agility
✓
<12 sa
L-run
✓
<6 s
DRILLS
Z-drill
✓
✓
<5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(generic
stimulus)
✓
<5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(specific
stimulus)
✓
✓
<5 sb
aThe length of the test has a large influence on the metabolic requirements and whether
changes in test performance can become a function of enhanced conditioning instead of
directly related to improvements in COD or agility ability.
bDuration dependent on distances used within the design of the drill. However, it is
advisable to keep the duration of the drill short to emphasize technical execution within the
drill.
Data from Gabbett et al. (2008); Nimphius et al. (2012); Pauole et al. (2000); Serpell et al.
(2011); Sierer et al. (2008); Vescovi and McGuigan (2008); Vescovi et al. (2011); Young
and Farrow (2013).
Change-of-Direction Ability
As stated earlier, one must understand that an athlete’s measured
COD ability may vary depending on the demand imposed by the
1442

chosen COD test. Therefore, it may be beneficial to choose different
tests that measure this ability under a high-velocity braking
requirement; with multiple COD; or, as will be discussed, in reaction
to a scenario, opponent, or stimulus. Another consideration
regarding COD ability is the orientation of the body leading into the
deceleration, through the transition phase as the athlete comes to a
stop, and then the positioning as he or she subsequently
reaccelerates out of the COD. Therefore, the positioning of the trunk
influences the performance of the COD. As such, it is a combination
of the ability to decelerate (high braking impulse), reorient the body
to face or partially face the direction of intended travel, and then
reaccelerate (high propulsive impulse) over short contact times that
truly determines COD ability. Additionally, the ability to perform the
COD requires the athlete to have the physical capacity to produce
high and rapid magnitudes of force, tolerate the high loads
associated with braking, and adopt favorable postures that are
associated with braking and propulsion (22, 35).
Considering the requirements for rapidly changing momentum,
increased muscle mass in combination with decreased body fat (i.e.,
improving functional mass) has been regarded as a predictor of COD
performance when assessed by the T-test in elite basketball players
(23). Other anthropometrics and their relationship to COD ability are
not discussed here, because aspects such as height and limb length
are not modifiable by the strength and conditioning professional.
Instead, body center of mass height is related to improved lateral
COD performance (89), and this can be actively targeted during
technique modification training (22, 35).
Overall, COD ability among a variety of movement patterns
(various angles of direction change) has been shown to improve with
increased hip extension velocity (rapid application of force by the hip
extensors), low center of mass height, wide lateral foot plants for
perpendicular force application, increased braking impulse and
propulsive impulse, increased knee flexion entering the COD,
minimized 
trunk 
angular 
displacement 
entering 
the 
COD
1443

(deceleration phase), and increased lateral trunk tilt (during 180-
degree changes) (22, 35, 80, 89, 94, 95, 97). Because the ability to
decelerate, hold body position, and then reaccelerate is important in
COD tasks as described by the kinetic and kinematic requirements of
faster COD and agility performances, it is clear that a well-rounded
approach to strength development involving dynamic, isometric, and
in particular eccentric strength capacities is needed for the
development of better COD performances (51, 97), with training
methods that span the entire load–velocity and force–velocity curve
(42) across multiple lower-limb and trunk segments (35). In contrast
to sprint development, it is recommended that athletes undergo
training that allows for the neuromuscular system to effectively
adapt to the rate of loading required during the braking phase, with
the understanding that the neuromuscular requirements for braking
capacity must be specifically trained using low- and high-velocity
eccentric muscle actions (38) such as those during drop landings,
landing from a loaded jump, or the catch phase of a power clean or
power snatch, in addition to supramaximal eccentrics that
particularly load the knee extensors. All of these place different
eccentric loading demands on the hips, knees, and ankles (67).
The biomechanical demands of directional changes are
influenced by approach speed and COD angle; thus,
practitioners should manipulate these two variables
cautiously when designing COD and agility activities.
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
When the physical ability to change direction rapidly is present, one
can focus on the components of perceptual-cognitive ability that
must be developed to bring together the ability to perform both
physically and mentally on the field of play. There are several
components 
of 
perceptual-cognitive 
ability: 
visual 
scanning,
anticipation, pattern recognition, knowledge of the situation,
decision-making time and accuracy, and reaction time (86, 88, 94,
1444

110, 111). Many of these aspects of development are sport specific,
and a comprehensive discussion is beyond the scope of this text.
However, general drills to help improve these skills are discussed in
the section on methods of developing agility.
Technical Guidelines and Coaching
In comparison to sprinting, COD and agility have a large degree of
freedom due to the multitude of movements that occur during a
COD. Further, agility performance as restricted or determined by
opponents or other tactical restraints and scenarios cannot be
trained through the use of a single technique, with evidence to
suggest we should be creating within- and between-skill variability
and a flexible coordinative approach (35). Nevertheless, the
following are some technical guidelines and coaching suggestions.
Visual Focus
When changing direction in response to an opponent (either
offensive or defensive), the athlete should visually scan the
environment and opponent while focusing on the shoulders,
trunk, and hip.
Following the anticipation of the event, unless deception is
intended, the athlete should quickly redirect attention to a new
area to help lead the transition of the body.
Body Position During Braking and Reacceleration
Control the trunk leading into the deceleration (decrease large
amounts of trunk motion) (80). When decelerating, posterior
trunk lean may assist in orienting the force vector posteriorly.
Through the stance phase, reorient the trunk and hips toward
the direction of intended travel to allow for a more effective
reacceleration (22) and to reduce the redirection demands for
a more effective position to produce force (35).
Just as with acceleration mechanics, body lean is paramount in
allowing proper force application through the ground with
1445

strong alignment of the ankle, knee, and hip to the trunk and
shoulders.
Enter and exit changes in direction with a lower center of
mass to increase stability and to enable a manipulation of the
base of support relative to the center of mass (89).
Leg Action
Ensure that the athlete can effectively dissipate or tolerate the
eccentric braking loads through an effective range of motion at
the hip, knee, and ankle (i.e., co-triple flexion) and avoid a
stiff-legged braking style (92, 94).
Emphasize a firm base of support for effective push-off and
manipulation of base of support relative to center of mass
(i.e., wide lateral foot plant when cutting, large anterior foot
placement when turning) while pushing the ground away in
order to enhance performance (i.e., rapid simultaneous triple
extension of ankle, knee, and hip), especially while learning in
closed drills. External focus of attention—through instructions
to concentrate on the ground instead of a body part—has
been shown to improve COD performance (76).
Arm Action
Powerful arm actions should be used to facilitate leg drive.
Ensure that the action of the arms is not counterproductive
(i.e., does not cause a decrease in speed or efficiency),
particularly during transitioning between difficult COD (e.g.,
from a backpedal to a sprint), while keeping the arms close to
the body to reduce the moment of inertia and to increase the
total body rotation velocities when changing direction (35).
Transitional Movements
Expressions of agility can be divided into three phases (21): a
transition whereby the athlete is in a ready position to read and
subsequently react to a situation that arises; an initiation, a
moment when an athlete initiates or changes movement (e.g., a
1446

COD); this leads to the actualization phase that involves a sport
skill or sprint to a position. For example, a corner back, when
tracking a wide receiver, may perform a backpedal (transition),
before performing a directional change (initiation) into a sprint and
then intercepting an underthrown pass (actualization). While the
success of this play or other expressions of agility manifest in the
actualization phase, the preceding phases are just as important and
require 
good 
technical 
execution. 
Backpedaling 
(rearward
locomotion with periods of double limb support and one foot in
contact with the ground between contralateral foot strikes) or
backward running (rearward locomotion involving single-leg
support 
throughout 
foot–ground 
contact 
and 
both 
feet
simultaneously in the air between foot strikes) (101) may be
performed to displace an athlete rearward while maintaining a
forward visual gaze of an opponent or ball, such as in basketball,
soccer, rugby, and football. The frequency and importance of
differing transitional movements may be sport dependent, and more
research is required in specific sports to develop this understanding
(12, 21). Nevertheless, practitioners should develop their athletes’
ability to perform a variety of transitional movements (e.g., lateral
shuffle, backpedal, crossover running) and to perform sprints from
these transitional movements to develop athletes’ movement
solutions and all-around physical literacy.
Figure 20.12 provides a technique checklist for common
transitional movements: the backpedal and side-shuffle. The
backpedal is an essential locomotive skill for a defensive back in
American football. The following drill progression could be used to
develop an athlete’s backpedaling technique before integrating the
skill with other actions or agility drills:
Backpedaling for 20 yards (18 m) along a marked line on the
football field to establish correct technique
Backpedaling for 20 yards (18 m), changing the pace of the
drill via an audio command (e.g., “slow” or “fast”), to develop
1447

the athlete’s ability to adapt backpedaling speed in line with
tracking an opponent
Backpedaling and then either on command or when reaching a
checkmark changing direction (either forward, backward, or
lateral to either side)
Backpedaling while tracking an opponent who is initially
running forward and then changing direction to sprint once the
opponent initiates a COD or sprint
A similar progression could be used for other transitional
movements such as side-shuffling in court-based sports such as
basketball and tennis.
Figure 20.12  Technique checklist for common
transitional movements: backpedal and side-
shuffle.
1448

Backpedal
Starting Stance
Stand in a split stance, ensuring stability.
Lower the center of mass by sinking the hips.
Flex the front hip and knee to approximately 45 degrees.
Flex the back knee to approximately 90 degrees and the hips to around 60
degrees.
The front foot should be flat (firm base of support), while the rear foot heel
should be raised. Distribute weight toward the balls of both feet.
Keep the back flat.
Lean the torso, with the shoulders over the front knee.
The head is up looking forward (or toward the opponent; visual scanning).
Relax the arms and hang them straight ahead of the hips.
First Step
1449

To initiate movement, drive off the back leg by extending the back leg knee
and hip with the center of mass (COM) moving behind center of pressure at
toe-off.
Using a low heel recovery, the front leg moves back behind the rear leg and
makes subsequent ground contact underneath the hips.
Each foot contact should be toe to heel (never heel first).
Keep hips low to increase stability.
Maintain a forward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent).
Involve a relaxed contralateral arm movement to match the timing and
amplitude of the leg movement. The range of motion at the shoulder should
be small.
The hips, knees, and ankles should be aligned in the frontal plane; avoid
planting the foot wider than the hips to help maintain torso and pelvic
position (i.e., hip step-width) and avoid a narrow step width.
Subsequent Steps
With each step, use a low heel recovery to keep the feet close to the ground
(i.e., rapid limb switching with minimal knee separation on ground contact)
to enable a quicker transition to a subsequent movement (e.g., COD or
forward sprint).
Keep the hips low to maintain a low COM again to help quicken the
transition into the subsequent movement (i.e., minimize vertical oscillation).
Possible cues include “stay low” or “drop the hips.”
Each foot contact should be toe to heel. A possible cue is “toe to heel.”
Ensure foot contact is in line with the hips in the frontal plane to avoid feet
crossing and the risk of trips or falls.
Maintain a forward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent). A possible
cue is “eyes up” or “head up.”
Use a relaxed, low-amplitude contralateral arm movement with the objective
to project COM rearward, with minimal vertical projection and oscillation.
Side-Shuffle
Start Position
Get in an athletic ready position: the feet are shoulder-width apart; weight is
distributed toward the balls of the feet; flex the hips, knees, and ankles (i.e.,
strong quarter-squat position); keep the back flat with a torso lean
(shoulders over knees); the head is up and the arms are by the sides with
elbows flexed and hands in front of the body.
1450

Foot Position
Foot contact is on the balls of the feet.
Feet are placed perpendicular to movement (parallel or slight hip external
rotation).
Feet stay close to the ground.
Foot placement is wider than the knees; increased width increases stability
and lowers COM.
The feet should not cross. (In a diagonal or faster shuffle, the feet may
cross using a crossover step to help with the directional change or provide
extra propulsion to increase velocity [21].)
Leg Action
Take short steps, driving more from the leg farthest (i.e., pushing the medial
aspect of foot) from the intended direction of travel (i.e., COM moves
medially relative to center of pressure at toe-off), with the other leg acting
as a pivot, allowing the COM to travel medially and assist the shuffle step
(COM is now over center of pressure).
Leg action is close to the ground in preparation for ground contact.
COM Travel
COM is projected medially or laterally, with minimal vertical projection and
oscillation.
The legs remain in a loaded athletic position and the trunk remains vertical.
1451

Posture
An athletic position is maintained throughout.
Maintain flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips, lowering the COM.
The back remains flat.
The head is in line with the body.
1452

Arm Action
Perform a short, rapid arm action in the sagittal plane.
Training Goals
The three goals to enhance agility performance through training are
to develop the physical qualities to allow athletes to adopt the
required postures and positions for a range of different agility
movements performed in the sport as well as enhance braking and
propulsion of such tasks (action capacity); to develop movement
efficiency and competency of range of agility movements pertinent
to the athlete’s sport, and to enhance perceptual-cognitive ability in
various situations and tactical scenarios (35).
1453

Methods of Developing Agility
As discussed throughout the chapter, a multifactorial approach is
warranted to develop both the physical and the perceptual-cognitive
aspects required for continual improvement in agility performance.
Therefore, one should consider a plan that addresses underpinning
physical capacities using various strength development strategies,
technical competence in a closed-skill environment with movement-
specific actions (COD ability), and improvement of perceptual-
cognitive capacity through agility drills and inherent aspects of skills
practice (58).
Strength
Similar to aspects of strength development for speed, strength
development for agility should emphasize relative strength and a
variety of speed–strength qualities along the force–velocity
spectrum. However, additional development of the eccentric strength
of the athlete due to the large braking forces during deceleration
and COD actions within expressions of agility should be considered.
This means that training exercises can include a spectrum of load–
velocity profiles in the weight room (42) as well as a variety of load–
velocity profile activities in the field, such as squat jumps,
countermovement jumps, and drop jumps of various heights in
combination with the COD and agility drills themselves. The
multifactorial nature of agility warrants a well-rounded approach to
strength development that spans the load– and force–velocity curve.
Table 20.4 provides an example of how training in the weight room
and on the field can satisfy the strength requirements underlying
agility performance. Understanding that athletes will develop the
physical requirements before being able to transfer newly gained
strength into technical competence helps coaches, strength and
conditioning professionals, and athletes realize that performance
gains will lag behind fundamental physical requirements for a given
technical skill (99).
1454

TABLE 20.4 Comparison of Focus for Agility
Development in Novice and Advanced Athletes
Strength
requirement
Novice
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Dynamic
strength: required
to provide base
strength for all
subsequent training
as well as to ensure
adequate mobility
during body weight
and loaded training
Body weight
exercises
Body
awareness
work such as
leaning drills
Squat (and
variations)
Pulls (and
variations)
Split-leg and
unilateral
variations
Various COD
drills
Concentric
explosive
strength (may
include isometric
strength work):
required to
effectively
reaccelerate (i.e.,
propulsion) after
the braking phase
or maintain strong
position through
the transition phase
of COD and agility
Bilateral and
unilateral box
jumps
Acceleration
drills
Banded
drills and
isometric
postural
holds
Box jumps
Weightlifting-
based
exercises
Squat jumps
(loaded)
Lower-limb
ballistic
exercises
initiated from
static
positions
Advanced
acceleration
drills (e.g.,
sled push)
Eccentric
strength: required
to develop the
ability to effectively
attenuate force,
absorb energy, and
support large
external lower-limb
flexion moments
required during the
Submaximal
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
(i.e., drop
landing,
single-leg
Submaximal
deceleration
drills (forward
emphasis and
teaching
various
deceleration
positions)
Advanced
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
performed in
various planes
Drop landings
and receiving
Maximal
deceleration
drills (high
velocity and
various angles)
Note: COD = change of direction.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-Performance Training
for Sports, edited by D. Joyce and D. Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194.
1455

Strength
requirement
Novice
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
braking phase of
COD and agility
hop, and
hold)
Flywheel
resistance
training,
lower-
submaximal
eccentrics,
and tempo
training
strength
required
during the
catch phase of
weightlifting-
based
exercises
Accentuated
eccentric
training
Maximal and
supramaximal
eccentrics and
resisted
eccentrics
Reactive
strength: required
to increase the
ability to transfer
from high eccentric
load to concentric
explosiveness
Drop landing
and landing
stabilization
exercises
Beginner
plyometrics
(slow to fast
SSC activities,
bilateral to
unilateral,
sagittal to
multiplanar)
Loaded jumps
Drop jumps
Complex or
contrast
training
Advanced
plyometrics
(fast SSC
activities,
unilateral, and
multiplanar
plyometrics)
Multidirectional
strength: required
to hold body
position strongly
during multitude of
movement
demands
Lunges,
landmine
skater squats
Low-velocity
COD (e.g.,
Z-drill)
Lateral,
backward,
and forward
COD drills
Unilateral
exercises
Greater
degree of
freedom
exercises
(e.g.,
landmine
exercises)
High-
velocity
COD drills
Challenging
cutting-
angle COD
drills
Perceptual-
cognitive
abilities: required
—
Simple reaction
drills:
introduction to
—
Small-sided
games
Note: COD = change of direction.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-Performance Training
for Sports, edited by D. Joyce and D. Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194.
1456

Strength
requirement
Novice
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)
Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
to progress in
visual scanning,
effective
anticipation, and
decision making
increasing
either temporal
or spatial
uncertainty
Agility drills
with
severely
restricted
temporal
and spatial
aspects
Virtual
reality and
video-based
training
Note: COD = change of direction.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-Performance Training
for Sports, edited by D. Joyce and D. Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194.
Change-of-Direction Ability
Similar to the progressions of plyometric activities based on intensity
and difficulty of each drill, closed-skill COD drills can progress from
beginner to intermediate to advanced levels based on the physical
loading demands that have been discussed in this chapter
(regulation of angle and intensity, which affect mechanical loading)
(36). Table 20.5 presents an example of a progression of drills for
COD ability (both rapid COD and those associated with
maneuverability), as well as a progression plan for agility drills. The
physical loading during agility drills will be higher than beginner COD
drills. Therefore, table 20.5 provides practitioners with a series of
drills and a guideline for safely and effectively advancing athletes so
they can build on their physical and technical attributes as they
improve.
TABLE 20.5 Change-of-Direction and Agility Drill
Progressions
1457

Agility
component
Beginner
Intermediate
Advanced
COD
Deceleration
drills (forward)
progressing to
higher entry
velocity or
shorter distance
to stop
Basic movement
patterns for
forward,
backward, and
lateral shuffling
COD drills that
involve low
velocities (less
than 5 yd [5 m]
of acceleration
into COD)—Z-
drill, for
example
Deceleration drills
(lateral) with same
progressions as forward
Expand to include a
broad range of cutting
angles less than 75
degrees
May increase entry
velocity during drills (up
to 10 yd [9 m] of
acceleration leading into
COD)
Deceleration to
reacceleration in
both forward and
lateral directions
Expand further to a
comprehensive
range of cutting
angles, including
those greater than
75 degrees
Maximal-effort
decelerations and
entry velocities
Maneuverability
Basic drills or tests
such as the Illinois
agility that require
nearly straight-line
running with slight
bends
Drills that increase the
difficulty of the bend
involved such as the L-
run
Drills that require
transition between
modes of movement
(shuffling, sprinting, and
backpedaling) such as
the T-test
Repeated
maneuverability
activities with
manipulated work-to-
rest ratios
Agility
Physical and
technical
competence should
occur before agility
drills are
incorporated
COD drills in beginner
and intermediate
categories with the
addition of simple stimuli
(arrow, pointing in a
certain direction)
Expand into large
degrees of spatial
and temporal
uncertainty (and
therefore greater
perceptual-
cognitive stress)
Note: COD = change of direction.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-Performance Training
for Sports, edited by D. Joyce and D. Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194.
1458

Agility
component
Beginner
Intermediate
Advanced
These drills present a
limited number of
options for the athlete to
have to react to (e.g.,
right or left, forward or
back) on the signal and
do not develop agility
per se; however, they
further increase intensity
of drills along the agility
development continuum.
Small-sided games
Evasion games and
drills
Note: COD = change of direction.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-Performance Training
for Sports, edited by D. Joyce and D. Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194.
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
During years of skills training (within the sport), athletes continually
enhance visual scanning, pattern recognition, and knowledge of the
situation, while in drills used to improve agility (outside of skills
practice) they primarily focus on improving anticipation, decision-
making time, and accuracy. In the same way one would regularly
increase the demands of a physical task to continually improve
performance, one can train perceptual-cognitive ability. Therefore,
agility activities should begin by adding a perceptual-cognitive
component (i.e., progressing from low to high cognitive loading) to
common closed-skill COD drills. For example, decelerations or the Z-
drill can evolve into agility drills by including a generic stimulus such
as a whistle, a voice command, or a flashing arrow or light (87, 110).
Following success with the aforementioned agility drills, progression
requires activities that have sport-specific stimuli such as evasive
drills and small-sided games, which have been said to have better
transfer to performance (87, 110). Both generic and specific stimuli
can be made more difficult within a given agility drill through
progressive increases in either temporal (time) or spatial (space or
1459

area) stress on the athlete. See table 20.6 for a range of agility
factors that can be manipulated in agility drill design.
TABLE 20.6 Mechanical and Perceptual-Cognitive
Factors That Can Be Manipulated During Agility Drills
Variable
Factor
Interpretation
Mechanical
Spacing and
pitch or court
dimensions
Altering the space and pitch or court dimensions will vary
the distances traveled and subsequent entry and exit
velocities and momentum achieved, and therefore allow
athletes to develop agility from lower velocity, intensive
scenarios, to higher velocity, extensive scenarios.
Additionally, entry velocity regulates intensity and
subsequent mechanical loading experienced.
Entry and exit
velocity
momentum
Agility actions
and angle of
COD
Practitioners can put restrictions on the type of COD
action performed or allow athletes to try a range of
different COD actions to develop between-skill variability
and movement solutions. Additionally, varying the
location of end or target zones can allow athletes to
develop shallow, moderate, and sharp COD ability to
enable them to be proficient in changing direction across
a spectrum of angles.
Starting position
(static or
transitional
movements)
Athletes can begin the drill from different static initiation
(e.g., drop step, jab step) and from different transitional
movements (i.e., backpedal, crossover running, lateral
shuffle) to create drill variability and to increase game
representativeness and ability to evade or defend from
different locomotor actions.
Perceptual-
cognitive
Location and
number of
attackers or
defenders
The location of the defenders and attackers can be
manipulated. For example, in addition to front-on
situations, defenders can be located to the side or behind
the attackers. This is pertinent for 360-degree sports in
which defenders and attackers can be located in various
locations on the pitch or court. The addition of multiple
attackers and defenders can increase game
representativeness, allowing the opportunity for decoy
runs; attacking and defensive transitions and set plays;
team communication; and increased chaos, task
complexity, cognitive loading, and variability.
Note: 
COD 
= 
change 
of
direction.
1460

Variable
Factor
Interpretation
Temporal
constraints
Temporal or time constraints can be administered (i.e.,
athlete has 5 s to achieve the objective) to maintain
quality and intensity (and often to replicate the reduced
temporal constraints associated in random sports). Work-
to-rest ratios can be manipulated for energy system
development and to represent peak demands of sports.
Rules and
conditions
Practitioners can be creative and vary the rules (i.e., one-
hand or two-hand tags) and put constraints on the
attackers or defenders to create variation (i.e., only two
evasive actions can be performed before committing to a
specific direction within the drill).
Environment and
surfaces
To increase game representativeness, drills should be
performed on the sport-specific surface. However, certain
sports may play on different surfaces (i.e., grass and
artificial turf) with different hardness and frictional
properties, and thus these should be considered.
Generic to sport-
specific stimulus
(developing
representative
learning
environments)
Generic stimuli and sources of information can be used
such as auditory commands, generic visual commands,
and stimuli such as flashing lights, arrows, and coach- or
player-dictated directional commands to increase
cognitive loading and increase mechanical loading in a
controlled environment. Typically, the timing of stimuli
can be controlled as well using specific equipment.
However, to increase game representativeness, develop
perceptual-cognitive speed, knowledge of situations,
memory recall, and anticipation, sport-specific stimuli
(i.e., multiple attackers or defenders, inclusion of sport-
specific implements and scenarios) can be included to
develop movement solutions and transfer to sporting
performance. These drills can be developed
collaboratively with the skills coach for simultaneous
technical and tactical development.
Task complexity
and cognitive
loading
To challenge more advanced athletes and to ensure
athletes are prepared for the chaotic demands of sport
when returning to sports, drills can begin with relatively
simple closed and open drills with one or two stimuli and
sources of information, before progressing to more
chaotic open drills of increased game representativeness
with various sources of stimuli and information (i.e.,
Note: 
COD 
= 
change 
of
direction.
1461

Variable
Factor
Interpretation
multiple attackers or defenders, inclusion of sport-specific
implements and stimuli can be included).
Note: 
COD 
= 
change 
of
direction.
1462

Program Design
Program design involves planning at several levels, each with its own
set of considerations: microcycles (short term), mesocycles (medium
term), and macrocycles (long term). The process is referred to as
periodization. Periodization is the strategic manipulation of an
athlete’s preparedness through the employment of sequenced
training phases defined by cycles and stages of workload (see
chapter 22). These planned workloads are varied to facilitate the
integration of planned programming tactics that will harmonize the
relationship between training-induced fatigue and accommodation
(30). Furthermore, the periodization process is guided by
information collected during the athlete monitoring process.
Specifically, as an athlete progresses through a training phase,
consistent 
information 
acquired 
through 
various 
monitoring
strategies helps to show how the athlete is responding to the
training stimulus in the short term and how the athlete should be
further developed in the long term—that is, how the original training
program should be modified to reflect responses to the training.
At each level of training plan development, strength and
conditioning professionals must manipulate certain variables. While
these are useful in characterizing the training agenda as well as
quantifying workloads, strength and conditioning professionals
should keep in mind that each variable must be considered
individually, and they should regard how it affects the collective
system. Moreover, individual athlete training responses, which
athlete monitoring reveals, should be used in the manipulation of
these variables:
Angle—The intended angle for COM deflection during the task
and a regulator for knee joint loading
Approach velocity—The horizontal entry velocity of the COM as
the athlete begins to initiate their COD action over multiple
steps and a regulator for knee joint loading
1463

Exercise (or work) interval—The duration or distance over
which a repetition is executed
Exercise order—The sequence in which a set of repetitions is
executed
Frequency—The number of training sessions performed in a
given time period (e.g., day or week)
Intensity—The effort with which a repetition is executed (% of
maximum)
Recovery (rest) interval—The time period between repetitions
and sets
Repetition—The execution of a specific workload assignment
or movement technique
Series—A group of sets and recovery intervals
Set—A group of repetitions and rest intervals
Volume-load—The density of volume performed at prescribed
intensities—for example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions at 100
kilograms results in a volume-load of 1,500 kilograms
Volume—The amount of work (e.g., 3 sets of 5 repetitions)
performed in a given training session or time period
Work-to-rest ratio—The relative density of exercise and relief
intervals in a set, expressed as a ratio
Chapter 22 explains periodization of resistance training programs,
and the same concepts can be applied to sprint, COD, and agility
training.
1464

Speed Development Strategies
The planning process for speed development is similar to that used
by strength and conditioning professionals in the weight room.
Specifically, planning tactics should be periodized in a manner that
addresses the physical and psychological components of sprinting
through emphasis and de-emphasis on particular qualities in a
phasic manner. An athlete’s capability to sprint can be improved
through the incorporation of training periods that are designed to
fully maximize and saturate a fitness quality, which may bolster the
effects of future training agendas.
To enhance speed, a practitioner should consider the relationship
between human locomotion and force production. Throughout this
chapter the authors have pointed to a link between sprint success
and certain physiological phenomena. Elite sprinters produce large
amounts of force within a short amount of time. This high level of
force allows the sprinter to produce longer step lengths at a faster
rate. This display of movement on the track reflects enhanced
neuromuscular factors—namely, maximal strength, RFD, and
impulse. These variables are the product of well-designed training
protocols that aim to enhance qualities such as the hypertrophy of
task-specific motor units, firing frequency, rate coding, and muscle–
tendon stiffness.
An option for speed development is provided in table 20.7,
demonstrating how sequenced phases of training may seamlessly
develop sprint potential through the maturation of accelerative
abilities before the execution of maximal-velocity efforts. This model,
which can be referred to as a short to long method of sprint training,
is a conceptual progression that attempts to merge the relationship
between larger rates of acceleration and greater sprint velocities
(discussed earlier in this chapter) (31). Specifically, an athlete taking
part in a short to long model will begin the training year with an
emphasis on improving propulsive force output through short sprints
that maintain the biomechanics associated with the acceleration
1465

phase of a sprint. Later, the athlete bridges into longer sprint work
that aims to enhance top speed through upright running mechanics.
The concept behind this proposed model is that an athlete may see
greater improvements in top speed if force production can occur at
the ideal rate and moment through an investment in acceleration
development and optimization (62). An alternative approach for
track sprinters (100-200 m) may involve sequencing training from
general to specific preparation starting with an aerobic foundation to
developing anaerobic capacity (short speed–endurance), to speed–
endurance (long speed–endurance) culminating in speed (inclusive
of acceleration and maximum velocity) before the main competition
(14, 46).
TABLE 20.7 Application of Speed Development
Strategies: Phasic Development for Short-Distance
Sprinting (e.g., 100 m sprinter; bobsled athlete)
Block and
emphasis
Training tool and notes
Load prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Block 1
Primary aim:
Acceleration
development
1. Use incline sprinting to develop proper
acceleration mechanics, providing an
opportunity to maximize propulsion forces
in the initial stages of a sprint.
2. Emphasize low heel recovery; driving the
foot down and through the ground;
aggressive and complete arm action;
neutral head position in line with the
spine. Resisted acceleration bounds could
be incorporated to emphasize lower limb
extension and forceful thigh retraction
during late swing.
Monday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 4 × 20 m (2 min)
Wednesday:
Resisted or sled
acceleration bounds (2
min)
1 × 4 × 15 m
1 × 2 × 20 m (2 min)
Friday:
Incline sprints
1 × 2 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 3 × 20 m (2 min)
1466

Block and
emphasis
Training tool and notes
Load prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
1 × 2 × 25 m (2.5
min)
Block 2
Primary aim: Long
acceleration
development
Secondary aim:
Improve transition
to upright sprinting
1. Introduce flat-ground sprinting from a
low starting position or towing
mechanism.
2. Promote the correct biomechanics of
transition sprinting from acceleration to
maximal velocity through the inclusion of
acceleration holds.b
Monday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 30 m (3 min)
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Wednesday:
Push-up starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Sled tows
2 × 3 × 20 m (2 min
/4 min)
Friday:
Crouch starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Block 3
Primary aim:
Introduction to max
speed training
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Exposure to speed–
endurance;
introduction to
special endurance
1. Maintain acceleration abilities through
inclusion of short sprints at the beginning
of most sessions.
2. Begin exposure to maximum speed
training through exercises that use
upright sprinting mechanics.
3. Prescribe speed–endurance or special
endurance sessions later in the week
when effects of summated fatigue may
dampen neural drive.
Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 20 m (2.5
min)
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Accelerations from
crouch stance
1 × 3 × 40 m (5 min)
Wednesday:
High-stance starts
1 × 3 × 20 m (2.5
min)
Fly-ins
1 × 4 × 20 m build/20
m fly (4 min)
Friday:
Block starts
1 × 4 × 20 m (3 min)
1467

Block and
emphasis
Training tool and notes
Load prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Accelerations from
crouch stance
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Speed–endurance from
two-point stance
1 × 2 × 60 m (5.5
min)
Block 4
Primary aim:
Enhance maximal
speed ability
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Continued
exposure to speed–
endurance and
special endurance
1. Continue exposure to maximum speed
training through longer fly-in zones or
race-modeling practices.
2. Maintain acceleration abilities through
incorporation of short sprints at the
beginning of most sessions.
3. Prescribe speed–endurance or special
endurance sessions relevant to the
athlete’s primary events.
Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Fly-float-fly
1 × 4 × 20/20/20 (7
min)
Wednesday
(technical session):
Ankling 2 × 15 m (1
min)
A-skip 2 × 20 m (1
min)
Ankle dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Calf dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Knee dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Dribble bleed 1 × 30 m
Straight-leg bound 2 ×
20 m (2 min)
Wicketc 2 × 30 m (3
min)
Wicket with run-off 2 ×
30 m + 15 m (4 min)
Dribble blend 2 × 2 ×
40 m (5 min)
1468

Block and
emphasis
Training tool and notes
Load prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Friday:
Block starts 1 × 3 × 25
m (3 min)
Speed–endurance from
two-point stance 1 × 2
× 50 m (6 min)
1 × 2 × 70 m (6.5
min)
1 × 2 × 90 m (7 min)
aEach session should be preceded by a warm-up that incorporates a range of technical
drills to work on aspects of technique in relation to both acceleration and maximum-
velocity sprinting (see sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 for examples). These drills
could also form dedicated technique sessions as depicted in block 4 of the table.
bAn acceleration hold is a sprint drill for which the strength and conditioning professional
places a cone on the track near or slightly before the point at which an athlete’s shin
typically rises to a vertical position, which is indicative of upright sprinting. The athlete is
then instructed to maintain the speed achieved up to the cone through the remainder of
the sprint. For instance, an athlete may be prescribed acceleration holds for 40 meters, but
the coach’s mark ending the acceleration zone is placed at the 20-meter mark on the track.
The athlete then maintains that speed from 20 meters to 40 meters. This drill is used to
begin to focus on improving transitional mechanics.
cWickets are a constrained sprinting task that involves a period of sprint running whereby
the athlete appears to step over objects (e.g., mini-hurdles) in an effort to encourage high
foot recovery and optimal front-side mechanics.
Biomechanical Differences in Acceleration
Between Sprint and Team-Sport Athletes
The ability to accelerate linearly and displace the COM rapidly is essential in track
sprinting and multidirectional team sports. Track sprinters are the fastest humans
on earth, and thus examining the biomechanics and techniques they adopt is
intuitive to better understand and optimize sprinting performance in athletes. Clear
biomechanical and technical differences exist between sprint and team-sport
athletes (25, 107); however, it is important to consider that environment, task, and
performer constraints will all interact and influence the acceleration strategy and
mechanics employed and the overall execution of the sprinting skill.
1469

Wild and colleagues (107) examined the first three steps during initial
acceleration and observed that sprinters achieved greater step velocities and
greater normalized average horizontal external power, and they displayed greater
normalized step length and flight length, greater normalized touchdown distance
(i.e., foot impact under or behind COM), and greater toe-off distance (i.e., effective
push-off behind COM) compared to rugby forwards and backs. Conversely, rugby
backs displayed slightly shorter contact times and slightly greater step rates
compared to sprinters. From a kinetics perspective for later acceleration at
matched velocities (step 8-12 for sprinters and 9-20 for soccer), while no
differences were observed in the initial 20% of the stance phase between sprinters
and soccer athletes, sprinters produced greater anterior–posterior force across
most of the propulsive phase and greater net forces over similar contact times,
thus resulting in greater relative net impulse (25). As such, the sprinters achieved
greater average horizontal external power, which allowed them to accelerate
beyond the velocity plateau of the soccer athletes.
It should be noted that the spatiotemporal, kinematic, and kinetic differences
observed could be partially attributed to sprinters accelerating from a four-point
position using blocks and performed on a rubber surface while wearing spikes. This
results in different body segment orientations such as greater forward trunk lean
and horizontal shin angles, which contribute to more horizontally orientated force
(107). Conversely, team-sport athletes initiate their sprints from a more upright,
two-point staggered-stance position (resulting in a more vertically orientated
force), on a different surface with less favorable frictional properties for achieving
peak speed (i.e., grass, field turf, indoor courts), and with different footwear that is
designed for multidirectional and sport-specific movements (e.g., cleats or
trainers). Additionally, sprinters’ preparation strategies are designed around the
sole task of maximizing linear speed, which is the aim of that sport, and an
isolated event. As such, sprinting is a skill, and thus, sprinters can dedicate more
time and deliberate practice to developing the skill of sprinting, while their
periodized strength and conditioning programs can also be tailored to maximize
the physical qualities that underpin linear sprinting. Conversely, team-sport
athletes must be proficient at a range of multidirectional movements (i.e.,
changing direction, curved sprints of varying radii and direction, compared to
sprinters who perform curved sprints anticlockwise with radii ≥40 yd [36.5 m], and
deceleration) and sport-specific skills (e.g., passing, tackling, shooting).
Additionally, team-sport athletes must perform technical and tactical training and
generally must do so repeatedly over the course of long matches (generally
ranging 40-90 mins) and competitive seasons. Due to these competing demands,
team-sport athletes must spend a significantly lower proportion of time developing
sprinting skills, while their preparation programs also differ due to the different
physical, biomechanical, and cardiorespiratory fitness demands between sports.
1470

Monitoring Sprint Ability
The longstanding method of assessing an athlete’s speed ability has
typically involved a test of maximal-effort linear sprinting. Much of
the time, the maximal-effort sprint test is carried out over a
distance, such as 40 yards (37 m), that is believed to be relevant to
the athlete’s sport. While time to completion is an effective tool to
evaluate changes in sprint performance, these tests do not fully
address the minute changes regarding an athlete’s progression
toward race or field readiness. In addition, testing error in the form
of hand timing and various start tactics confound the interpretation
of testing results. As a result, strength and conditioning professionals
may consider the adoption of additional monitoring tools as part of
their battery of assessments.
One such method of evaluation comes from the assistance of
high-speed cameras or optical timing systems that use interruptions
of infrared light to capture data from an athlete’s collective foot
strike (15). This technology provides strength and conditioning
professionals with additional insight into the sprint capabilities of the
athlete, such as technique and movement strategies (16).
Additionally, 
technology 
that 
permits 
the 
quantification 
of
instantaneous speed is also advantageous for insights into speed at
specific distances, time to achieve specific speeds, peak speed,
acceleration, and τ (acceleration time constant). Table 20.8 provides
a description of key variables that may be beneficial in the
monitoring of speed development.
TABLE 20.8 Monitoring Speed Development
Measure
Description
Interpretation
Ground
contact time
The total time allotted for a
single stance phase.
In general, decreased ground contact
times coupled with improved sprint
completion times may suggest that an
athlete has improved the ability to
generate high rates of force in a shorter
Note: ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional; LiDAR
= light detection and ranging.
1471

Measure
Description
Interpretation
amount of time. However, an athlete may
demonstrate slightly longer ground
contact times at the initial stages of the
sprint due to acceleration mechanics.
Step length
The distance between the toe
and heel of two consecutive
footsteps. Example: centimeters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the left
foot.
Improvements in step length (increases
in distance covered) may occur through
improved sprint mechanics or posture
and ultimately enhanced force output.
Stride
length
The distance between the heel
in two consecutive steps of the
same foot. Example: meters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the next
ground contact made by the
right foot.
Improvements in stride length (increases
in distance covered by two successive
steps) may occur through improved sprint
mechanics or posture, and ultimately
enhanced force output.
Flight time
The duration of time that an
athlete is not in contact with the
ground. This occurs between
the end of one step and the
beginning of the subsequent
step.
Increases in flight time can be interpreted
in two ways:
An athlete is producing higher vertical
forces over a shorter amount of time,
resulting in optimal horizontal
displacement of the athlete’s mass
down the track.
An athlete is producing higher forces
over a longer amount of time, which
may result in unnecessary vertical
amplitude of the center of mass.
Stride angle
The angle at which the foot
leaves the track.
The angle of stride may provide the
strength and conditioning professional
with the ability to determine if the athlete
is producing forces at the right moment,
which is achieved through proper sprint
mechanics. Furthermore, data on the
stride angle elucidate what stage of sprint
the athlete is attaining (acceleratory,
transitory, maximum speed) and may
relate to ground contact times.
Note: ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional; LiDAR
= light detection and ranging.
1472

Measure
Description
Interpretation
Speed
The relationship between steps
and the sum of the first step’s
ground contact time and the
flight time leading to the
subsequent ground contact.
Alternatively, instantaneous
speed or velocity can be
examined using GPS technology,
LiDAR, laser, radar, motorized
resistance devices, and 2D and
3D motion capture.
Speed dictates how fast an athlete can
move the body mass over a specific
distance.
Instantaneous speed/velocity at time
points/distances can be calculated,
facilitating a greater insight into sprint
strategy
Acceleration
The change in speed as
determined by the delta of two
steps (e.g., right heel to left
heel) and the sum of ground
contact times and flight times of
each step.
Acceleration provides insight into how
well the athlete changes speed
(increasing velocity in a direction) over a
prescribed distance. For most athletes,
furthering the length an athlete can
accelerate will lead to higher top speed,
provided that postural integrity and
mechanics are sound.
Technique
Acceleration and maximum
velocity techniques can be
objectively quantified (i.e., joint
angles) or qualitatively
examined and compared to
technical models to help
improve performance and
mitigate injury risk.
Qualitative analysis is relatively simple to
perform and only requires filming of
sprint technique. High-speed video
recording is a common feature of most
smartphones and tablets, and athletes’
technique can be compared to technical
models such as Altis Kinogram or Sprint-
Mechanics assessment score (16) to help
individualize training.
Note: ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional; LiDAR
= light detection and ranging.
1473

Agility Development Strategies
The development of agility is best achieved using a periodized
programming method. Random programming or the development of
agility using only sport-specific methods such as small-sided games
has not been found to be as effective (13). Although agility is a
constant element on the field of play or during skills practices, it is
recommended that agility development begin with the use of COD
drills (preplanned) and progress in difficulty through increases in the
physical demands; this is followed by the addition of drills involving
perceptual-cognitive stress or what are typically termed agility drills
(60, 110). In line with this recommendation, the development of
agility should start with a needs analysis based on assessment of the
athlete’s COD ability and agility. The agility test should specifically
evaluate perceptual-cognitive ability, as previously described in table
20.3 on page 655. Further, depending on the additional movement
requirements of the sport, one may also choose to use a test that is
more dependent on maneuverability.
The following is an example of steps for determining the
appropriate tests, analyzing the results, and using them to program
agility development of an athlete. Because agility performance is
underpinned by multiple factors, one should target the largest
window of opportunity through direct assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses of the athlete.
Step 1. Perform a needs analysis of the sport and match tests
appropriately to assess these qualities (table 20.9).
Step 2. Determine strengths and weaknesses by comparing results
as a standardized score to performance standards or team mean
(figure 20.13).
Step 3. Plan the development of a primary area of need and a
secondary area of need for the athlete.
Step 4. Distribute the time available for this development based on
need identification.
1474

Step 5. Provide a preliminary plan for transition of percent
distribution through the training blocks (table 20.10). Determine if
this progression is appropriate by monitoring the development of
COD and agility as described in table 20.8 (e.g., COD deficit).
TABLE 20.9 Needs Analysis for Agility Development
Sport
Basketball
Timeframe
12 weeks (8 weeks off-season and 4 weeks preseason
training)
Sport-specific agility
needs analysis
High-velocity COD
Backdoor cuts, cuts through the lane, fast break, and
possession changes
Maneuverability (multiple modes of COD movement)
Defensive shuffling, backpedaling, and bending changes
of direction around screens to lose defender
Agility (perceptual-cognitive)
Decision-making time (provides great advantages both
offensively and defensively)
Ability to move in reaction to play or opponent
Recommended tests
5-0-5 including COD, T-test, agility test (decision time
measured)
Note: COD = change of direction.
1475

FIGURE 20.13 Strengths and weaknesses of an athlete through representation of
standardized scores for perceptual-cognitive ability, maneuverability, and COD ability.
Negative values indicate performance lower than average, whereas positive values indicate
performance better than average.
With the information provided by the testing as well as
considering other physical fitness capacities, one can implement an
appropriate periodized plan. Table 20.11 shows an example of three
blocks of training (four weeks each). The length of time for a
training session is between 10 and 15 minutes inclusive of work and
rest time and can be completed one to three times per week
depending on additional requirements of the athletes (e.g., skills
training increasing in the preseason). A variety of drills can replace
the examples given here; however, they should be chosen based on
their classification and ability to address the athlete’s needs.
TABLE 20.10 Planned Distribution of Training Blocks
for Agility Development
COD
Maneuverability
Agility (perceptual-
cognitive)
PRIMARY AIM
SECONDARY AIM
TERTIARY AIM
Estimated %
time allotted
Block 1 ~65%
Block 2 ~60%
Block 1 ~35%
Block 2 ~30%
Block 1 N/A
Block 2 ~20%
1476

COD
Maneuverability
Agility (perceptual-
cognitive)
through
blocks
Block 3 ~50%
Block 3 ~25%
Block 3 ~25%
Additional
comments
Check strength or
specifically load
absorption ability
with drop
landings.
Assess body
positioning during
lateral shuffling and
COD.
May be reliant on perceptual-
cognitive ability. This may
have previously masked the
identification that the athlete
could improve his or her
physical COD ability.
TABLE 20.11 Application of Agility Development
Strategies
Block and emphasis
Training tools and notes
Load prescription for week 1
Block 1
Primary aim: COD
(deceleration capacity
—linear)
Secondary aim:
Maneuverability (body
position)
Braking tasks are eccentric
focused; therefore, start
with low volumes similar to
those used to introduce
eccentric tasks
(plyometrics).
Focus on the athlete
staying low; sacrifice speed
for positioning, and
emphasize optimal
deceleration mechanics.
2-3 sessions per week; rest period
between sets
COD Drill
Decelerations* (5 yd [5 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s)
(Alternate nonpreferred,
preferred leg finish braking
[split stance] position and
bilateral athletic ready
position.)
Maneuverability Drill
Lateral shuffling @ height or
backpedaling 1 × 4 × 11 yd
[10 m] (30 s)
Block 2
Primary aim: COD
(deceleration capacity
—lateral)
Secondary aim:
Maneuverability
Ensure that the athlete can
use body position to
effectively brake when
oriented both forward and
laterally; focus on the
athlete absorbing into stop.
2-3 sessions per week; rest
periods between sets
COD Drill
Decelerations* (11 yd [10 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s) as with
week 1; use same variations
Note: COD = change of direction.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceleration drills through the weeks—for
example, half speed to three-quarters speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop drills inclusive of generic and sport-specific stimuli.
Note: There is not a separate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addressed in conjunction with speed sessions.
1477

Block and emphasis
Training tools and notes
Load prescription for week 1
(transition between
modes of COD—
shuffle to sprint to
shuffle)
Expand to a single effort in
reaction to generic
stimulus.
Promote effective
application of force into the
ground (“pushing the
ground away”); watch
shank angle and trunk
position for visual
feedback.
Decelerations (lateral) 1 × 4
(30 s)
Maneuverability Drill
Z-drill (forward) 2 × 4 (30 s; 2
min) (Always alternate start
direction: left to right vs. right
to left direction)
Y-drill using different cutting
maneuvers; side-step,
crossover, or split-step to
develop movement solutions.
Ensure exit out of directional
change is completed into a
rapid deceleration. 3 × 4 (1
min; 3 min) (Generic stimuli
could be added later within the
block)
Block 3
Primary aim: COD
(effective deceleration
to reacceleration)
Secondary aim:
Maneuverability
(combine effective
transition and body
positioning)
Tertiary aim: Agility
(focus on keeping
COD performance and
body position even in
response to a generic
stimulus)
Focus on “braking in” and
“exploding out” of the
COD.
Focus on footwork and
keeping low, with steps
that promote a “drop and
drive” out of the COD.
This is used to check the
transfer of physical training
to a more specific (yet still
generic) stimulus. Focus on
the “decide and go,”
checking for athletes to
reorient effectively or to
move as effectively as they
decide.
1-2 sessions per week (depending
on skills volume); rest period
between sets
COD Drill
Modified 5-0-5 drill 2 × 4 (30
s; 2 min) (Alternate plant foot)
Maneuverability Drill
T-test 1 × 4 (30 s)
Agility
Reactive agility (Y agility drill) 1
× 4 (30 s) (Same direction in
response to pointing in a
direction)
Skills training will also
inherently contain sport-
specific stimulus training
Note: COD = change of direction.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceleration drills through the weeks—for
example, half speed to three-quarters speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop drills inclusive of generic and sport-specific stimuli.
Note: There is not a separate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addressed in conjunction with speed sessions.
1478

Monitoring Agility and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In line with the concepts considered in monitoring sprint
performance, simply assessing performance modification in either
COD or agility according to time to completion of the chosen test
does not isolate the physical quality or perceptual-cognitive quality
that one is trying to examine—the actual ability to change direction
(70, 71, 73, 92, 96). Therefore, when monitoring COD or agility
performance, the strength and conditioning professional may
consider the measures in table 20.12. Although these aspects of
performance have been measured using expensive devices such as
three-dimensional motion analysis equipment, readily available high-
speed cameras (collecting more than 100 frames per second) could
easily be used in conjunction with the usual timing methods (hand
or electronic).
TABLE 20.12 Monitoring Agility Development
Measure
Description
Interpretation
Completion
time
Total time to complete the task
Represents the duration it takes the
athlete to get from A to B but can be
biased toward athletes with superior
linear speed; provides limited
information regarding COD ability,
technique, or strategy. Can be simply
assessed using a stopwatch or ETGs.
COD deficit
The difference in time between
a straight-line sprint and a
COD test of equal length
Assessing the COD deficit provides
insight into the additional amount of
time required by the athlete due to the
demands of COD. An example is
subtraction of 10 m sprint time from 5-0-
5 COD time (a common COD test is 10 m
in length). However, COD deficit can be
biased toward slower athletes and
Note: COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electronic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= three-dimensional; LiDAR = light detection and ranging.
1479

Measure
Description
Interpretation
provides limited information regarding
COD ability, technique, or strategy.
Ground
contact time
(GCT)
The total time the foot is in
contact with the ground during
the COD (length of the plant
phase, main execution plant
foot contact)
Shorter ground contact times are
generally associated with faster COD
performance and indicate the athlete is
spending less time performing the COD
(if the athlete deflects their COM at the
same angle). Insight into GCT can
establish whether the athlete is
improving their COD ability irrespective
of total time. GCT can be measured
using a built-in force platform, contact
mat, or verified using 2D analysis.
Exit velocity
The horizontal velocity of
the athlete during the initial
step out of the plant of the
COD
Considered the first step of
reacceleration from plant
foot to foot strike
Unlike the situation for total time, using
a high-speed video camera or 3D motion
analysis to assess the velocity of the
athlete (at the hip or COM) can give a
direct measure of the ability to change
direction. Improved exit velocity with the
same or faster ground contact times
implies greater RFD relevant to
improving COD ability.
Entry velocity
Velocity of the athlete before
the plant phase; can be
measured over several steps or
as the last step entering the
plant phase of the COD
Entry velocity is a strong determinant of
COD completion time, and the ability to
enter the COD with high velocity can be
advantageous for COD actions. Insight
into entry velocity can be used to
establish whether any pacing or self-
regulatory strategies are adopted.
Assessed using the above methods for
exit velocity.
Decision-
making time
Measurement of the time
between two events is
considered decision-making
time and can either be a
positive or a negative value.
Decision-making time can be
broken down into two different
orientations to
Similar to the measurement of entry and
exit velocity, a high-speed camera can be
positioned to the side of the directional
change to capture both the stimulus and
the athlete’s first definitive foot plant to
change direction in response. If the
decision-making time is negative, this
indicates that the athlete anticipated the
Note: COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electronic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= three-dimensional; LiDAR = light detection and ranging.
1480

Measure
Description
Interpretation
comprehensively assess how
athletes respond during game
scenarios: (a) defensive (move
in the same direction as the
stimulus); (b) offensive (move
in the opposite direction to the
stimulus).
directional change before the stimulus
finalized the movement. Negative
decision-making time is observed only
during response to movements of
another person (video or human
stimulus), highlighting the importance of
stimulus specificity during agility
protocols. The measurement of decision-
making time in both defensive and
offensive situations allows strength and
conditioning professionals to identify
whether athletes need to develop
perceptual-cognitive ability in a specific
game scenario.
COD phase-
specific
information
Kinetic or kinematic data
pertaining to the approach or
acceleration, deceleration,
turn, and reacceleration
phases of a COD task
This enables the practitioner to examine
the overall COD by splitting the task into
several phases (e.g., approach, COD,
and exit). This information enables the
identification of COD strategy and
establishes strengths and areas for
development. Essentially, it provides
further information regarding how the
athlete achieved that completion time.
Advanced technology such as LiDAR or
radar may provide information regarding
time and distance braking and speed at
braking onset.
Alternative
considerations
Practitioners should also
consider the athlete’s
momentum into the COD task
because greater momentums
require greater braking
impulse to decelerate.
Additional monitoring of pacing
strategies is also essential
because athletes may regulate
entry speed to reduce
momentum to make
deceleration or braking easier.
Finally, video analysis is also
Note: COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electronic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= three-dimensional; LiDAR = light detection and ranging.
1481

Measure
Description
Interpretation
recommended to observe
technique to understand
compensatory strategies, areas
for development, and
comparison to technical
models.
Note: COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electronic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= three-dimensional; LiDAR = light detection and ranging.
1482

Conclusion
Speed, change of direction, and agility are well-established measures
of athletic prowess in most sporting contexts. For this reason,
strength and conditioning professionals should be aware of how
these abilities are established and modified through training plan
design and execution. These components of athletic movement and
game play are underpinned by task-specific force application. This
task-specific force production must be large enough to stabilize the
athlete’s body weight in the presence of gravity, displace the athlete
from one point to another, and continue moving the athlete at high
velocities.
Running speed is associated with the relationship between step
length and rate. Sprinting is a near-maximum to maximum run that
is defined by large rates of force developed within a short stance
time. Better sprinters spend more time in the air as a result of
increased step lengths that occur at faster rates than those of their
slower counterparts and are better able to produce larger net forces
that are oriented optimally for effective acceleration and top speed.
Agility encompasses the skills and abilities needed to explosively
change movement direction, velocities, or modes in response to a
stimulus. Both sprinting and agility use the SSC and greater
neuromuscular efficiency compared to slower movements. However,
agility includes perceptual-cognitive demands such as visual search
scanning, decision making, anticipation, and reaction times that
make it a separate training quality.
Strength and conditioning professionals aiming to improve these
performance attributes should do so through the cyclic and
sequential arrangement of training phases that harmonize strength
training with speed, agility, or COD practice or some combination of
these. This training effect may best result from the incorporation of
exercises that are task specific and promote proper movement
mechanics. The training prescribed should reflect the results of a
needs analysis assessment at the beginning of a long phase or year.
1483

Furthermore, subsequent training plans should be optimized through
an ongoing athlete monitoring program, which can assist the
strength and conditioning professional in determining how the
athlete is responding to the programmed agenda.
SPEED AND AGILITY DRILLS
SPEED DRILLS
  1  Ankling  675
  2  A-Skip  67 6
  3  B-Skip  678
  4  Switches  680
  5  Dribbles  681
  6  Straight-Leg Bound  682
  7  Sprint Resistance: Incline for Acceleration  684
AGILITY DRILLS
  8  Deceleration Drill  685
  9  Y Agility Drill  686
10  Multiplanar Acceleration Initiation Box Drill  689
11  Evasion Drill  690
Speed Drills
  1   ANKLING
Ankling is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the correct
foot contact strategy during maximum-velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stacked joints).
1484

Movement Phase
Initiate movement by pushing off one limb through the ankle,
achieving a small flight phase. For the subsequent foot ground
contact, the ankle should be in a neutral position and make
contact on the forefoot under the hips or center of mass.
During ground contact there should be minimal knee and ankle
flexion. The athlete should be cued to “punch the ground” with
the limb, emphasizing short, stiff ground contacts with each
ground contact.
The trunk should remain upright with a slight lean and hips
extended (little to no flexion during ground contact). The
contralateral arm range of movement will be small, but the
speed of the arm movement should match the rate of foot
contacts.
Technique Tips
Ensure an upright trunk and avoid leaning back.
Make sure the athlete drives vertically with each foot contact,
emphasizing a stiff strategy landing on the forefoot with the
ankle in a neutral position.
Ensure the arm movement is timed with the leg movement and
will be of a low amplitude.
Avoid excessive hip flexion, resulting in excessive foot contact
ahead of the COM, with the aim for foot contact as close as
possible to under the COM.
1485

  2   A-SKIP
The A-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg recovery mechanics for maximum-velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stacked joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel. The foot of the lifted
leg (swing leg) should be approximately at knee height of the
stance leg, with the heel pulled up under the buttocks and the
ankle dorsiflexed. This will result in the appearance of a figure
four at the legs. The swing leg will always accord with this
description.
Begin the first skip by driving the swing leg down to the ground
through an active foot, established through slight dorsiflexion.
Lift the big toe up to establish appropriate dorsiflexion.
1486

Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near–triple extension of the new stance leg occurs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appearance of stacked joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to create a swing leg.
The force generated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the track.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall posture with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cycles.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includes an A-march, which involves the
same movements but at a slower pace to establish the correct
leg recovery mechanics. If athletes struggle coordinating the
contralateral arm movement, the hands can be placed on the
hips initially.
To progress from the A-skip, a running form emphasizes the leg
recovery action with the thighs reaching parallel with the
ground.
1487

  3   B-SKIP
The B-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg recovery and subsequent touchdown mechanics for
maximum-velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
1488

Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stacked joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel (i.e., front-side
mechanics). The foot of the lifted leg (swing leg) should be
approximately at knee height of the stance leg, with the heel
pulled up under the buttocks and the ankle dorsiflexed. This will
result in the appearance of a figure four at the legs. The swing
leg will always accord with this description.
Begin the first skip by aggressively driving the swing leg down
to the ground through an active foot, established through slight
dorsiflexion. Lift the big toe up to establish appropriate
dorsiflexion. (The main difference between the A- and B-skip is
the more aggressive driving down of the swing leg to
emphasize correct touchdown mechanics and increased angular
velocities.)
Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near–triple extension of the new stance leg occurs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appearance of stacked joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to create a swing leg.
The force generated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the track.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall posture with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cycles. If the
athlete struggles initially to coordinate the contralateral arm
1489

action, the athlete could place the hands on hips to initially
master the correct leg recovery and touchdown action.
During the aggressive drive down of the swing leg, ensure the
leg sweeps back to contact the ground with the forefoot under
the hips.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includes a B-march or -walk, which
involves the same movements but at a slower pace to establish
the correct leg recovery and touchdown mechanics. A
progression from the B-skip involves a running form
emphasizing the leg recovery to touchdown action and
overhead variations to focus on trunk stability and lumbopelvic
control.
1490

  4   SWITCHES
Switches emphasize rapid limb switching and path of movement of
the feet that resemble the more linear path of movement associated
with accelerative sprinting.
Starting Position
1491

Stand on one leg with one leg flexed 90 degrees at the hip and
knee to ensure the thigh is parallel with the ground. The ankle
is neutral or dorsiflexed, which emphasizes front-side mechanics
and a positive shin angle. The contralateral arm is held with the
elbow flexed to <90 degrees and with the hand around the
height of the chin.
The foot of the standing leg is flat on the ground, and the
ipsilateral arm is relaxed by the side of the body.
The trunk is upright with the head up and eyes looking forward.
Movement Phase
While maintaining an upright trunk with the head up, the
athlete simultaneously drives the standing leg up and the flexed
leg down, emphasizing rapid switching of the limbs.
The contralateral arm movement matches the speed of the leg
movement.
The landing of the previously flexed limb on the ground and the
standing limb to the flexed position should occur at the same
time. Pause in this position (initial position) before repeating for
a desired number of repetitions.
Technique Tips
Ensure an upright trunk and head with no leaning back or
excessive lumbar flexion.
Emphasize rapid leg and arm switching, avoiding excessively
high thigh and knee lifts (>90 degrees).
Progressions
Rather than perform with a pause between repetitions, this drill
can progress to performing repeatedly for a desired number of
repetitions on the spot (e.g., 2 or 3) before pausing.
A further progression would be to add a mini-hop forward
between repetitions but still emphasizing the rapid limb,
switching to establish a more rhythmic pattern. Trunk stability
1492

and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with overhead
variations.
  5   DRIBBLES
This drill, which assists with many aspects of the technical running
model involving a scaled running practice, emphasizes the more
circular path of the foot during maximum-velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
Lift one leg so the foot is above the opposing ankle with toes
pointed up, then sweep the foot down and back to make foot
contact. As the center of mass moves ahead of the foot, the
foot should drive up and over the ankle. Repeat this circular
foot motion with each limb for the designated distance. The
1493

foot contact should be with the ankle in a neutral position and
may begin heel to toe with each foot contact.
The drill will involve a low knee lift but will become larger with
progressions. The foot contact will also progress to forefoot
contact with these progressions.
The trunk leans forward slightly with the head up and eyes
looking forward. The athlete adopts a contralateral arm
movement at a lower amplitude of maximal sprint running, but
the timing and range of motion should match the timing and
range of motion of the legs.
Technique Tips
Emphasize the circular recovery motion of the foot.
Maintain a slight trunk lean with head up and eyes looking
forward.
Ensure the contralateral arm movement matches the timing and
range of motion of the leg action.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the ankle dribble, he or she
could lower the intensity to a walking pace and work on the
circular path of movement of the foot over the opposing ankle
using a heel–toe contact.
Progression from the ankle dribble involves greater range of
movement of the circular foot pattern, so the foot first reaches
calf height (calf dribble) and then knee height (knee dribble).
Furthermore, after mastering these versions, progressions could
involve dribble bleeds whereby the athlete may progress from
ankle to calf to knee dribble within the same repetition or blend
a knee dribble to a high-speed run.
1494

  6   STRAIGHT-LEG BOUND
This drill emphasizes rapid retraction of the lower limb, offering
similarity to the desired touchdown leg mechanics of maximum-
velocity sprinting and increasing hip angular velocity and foot
touchdown velocity.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
After an initial upward and forward hop from one limb, while
maintaining a straight limb (extended knee and neutral ankle
position), drive the opposite hip forward and then rapidly retract
the limb to make ground contact on the forefoot before
rebounding and repeating with the opposite limb.
Emphasize the rapid retraction of the limb in preparation for
ground contact, and ensure that ground contact times remain
short and, ideally, under the hips.
The trunk should be maintained in an upright position (must
avoid leaning back), with the head up and eyes looking forward.
1495

The athlete should adopt a contralateral limb movement that
matches the timing and range of motion of the limbs.
Technique Tips
Maintain an upright trunk without leaning back.
Emphasize rapid, forceful retraction of the limb toward ground
contact, and ensure that ground contacts are short and under
the hips.
Adopt a contralateral arm movement that matches the timing
and range of motion of the lower limbs.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the straight-leg bound, the
athlete could lower the intensity by reducing the hip flexion
range of motion and speed of retraction, and gradually and
progressively build up the speed and range of motion.
Trunk stability and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with
overhead variations of straight-leg bounds, and straight-leg
bounds can be transitioned or blended into normal upright
running with the aim that previous straight-leg bounds will
transfer to increased hip angular velocities, limb retraction, and
active touchdowns with high velocities (i.e., 20-yard straight leg
build up into flying 20-yard sprint).
1496

  7   SPRINT RESISTANCE: INCLINE FOR
ACCELERATION
Incline sprinting is a type of resisted sprinting that is prescribed to
promote physical and technical improvements within the acceleration
phase of a sprint. Alternative approaches to using an incline include
using weighted sleds.
Starting Position
1497

Begin in the correct starting position (commonly called a
crouched start). First, split the stance position by placing the
dominant leg forward and dropping the back or swing leg by
one to two foot lengths.
The length of split between the drive and swing leg is largely
determined by the compromise between the (a) ability to
generate sufficient forces needed to overcome a lower center of
gravity and (b) comfort. In addition, the feet should be split in
such a manner that the front and back legs are in line with the
pelvis, so that no unnecessary twisting of the hips occurs.
Once the split stance has been established, drop the back knee
straight down so that the shank (shin) is nearer (more parallel)
to the ground. This aids in promoting the proper driving position
needed to begin acceleration.
With a tall and rigid torso, raise the arm that is opposite to the
front or drive leg to a position near or slightly above the
forehead. The hand should be spaced approximately 6 to 8
inches (15-20 cm) away from the forehead. The rear arm
(opposite to the rear or swing leg) should be pulled back to a
point at which the hand is near the lateral aspect of the
buttocks with an elbow angle that may range from 100 degrees
to 120 degrees. This position allows for the arm action to assist
in producing sufficient propulsive forces to overcome static
inertia.
On completion of setup, lean the entire body forward so that
60% of the body weight is on the front leg. Avoid breaking at
the waist during this shift. The athlete should continue to feel
balanced and stable.
Movement Phase
After body weight has been transferred, the athlete can initiate
the sprint through an aggressive push down and through the
ground via the front or drive leg.
1498

The back leg should also assist in force production but will leave
the ground earlier due to the starting stance position. Arm
action should be synchronous with leg action.
Technique Tips
Cue the athlete to maximize accelerative mechanics through a
low heel recovery of the rear or swing leg. This should be
staged through the proper setup of the crouched starting
position described earlier.
Coach the athlete to continue aggressively pushing against the
ground alongside an arm swing that may be cued to emphasize
a hand that is pulled down and back. Arm action often parallels
movements of the legs.
The torso should remain tall and tight with the head in a neutral
position. The torso and head are in line and will rise at the
same rate as the hips gradually rise.
Agility Drills
  8   DECELERATION DRILL
The deceleration drill requires the athlete to reduce horizontal
momentum (negative acceleration) across a series of foot contacts
as an isolated agility action or prior to a COD maneuver (35).
1499

Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints to a predetermined distance (i.e., 5, 10, or
20 yards or meters) before braking and decelerating over a
series of steps as rapidly as possible.
Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaximally, preplanned, and over smaller
approach distances and thus velocity before increasing intent
and increasing approach distances and subsequent velocities,
and momentum. Deceleration drills can be further developed
through the use of generic and sport-specific stimuli. For
example, the “Stop at the Lights” game is a game-based agility
drill in which the athletes must react to the green (accelerate)
and red (decelerate) signals from the coach. Athletes race to
the end and are disqualified if they are unable to stop on
command. Additionally, drills can be further developed through
the use of auditory stimuli (i.e., “stop”) and partner or opponent
stimuli.
Variations
Practitioners can vary the initiation positions and planes of
motion (two-point, three-point, falling, false step, amplitude
jump, crossover cut, pivot, torso rotation, drop step, pop steps)
and develop a range of different deceleration actions to improve
movement 
solutions. 
Deceleration 
positions 
include 
the
following:
Bilateral (athletic ready position)
Split position
Transverse (jockey position)
Lateral deceleration position
Diagonal (crossover)
1500

  9   Y AGILITY DRILL
The Y agility drill requires the athlete to plant his or her foot laterally
opposite to the direction of travel to create a propulsive impulse into
the new intended direction (35). Cutting is the key movement with
this drill.
Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints linearly to a predetermined distance (e.g., 5
yards or meters) and then performs a side-step cutting action
45 degrees to the left or right and accelerates a further 5 yards
or meters (or alternative distance).
1501

Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaximal, preplanned, and applied over
smaller approach distances and, therefore, involve lower
approach velocities. The drill can then be progressed by
performing it maximally or by increasing the approach
distances, which would lead to greater approach velocities and
1502

momentum 
(thereby 
increasing 
the 
braking 
demand
experienced prior to and during the directional change).
Y agility drills can be further progressed using generic or sport-
specific stimuli. For example, the drill can be adapted whereby
the athletes must react to auditory or visual stimuli when
approaching the turning area, such as a color cone or auditory
command (i.e., left or right). Moreover, the tasks can be further
developed by incorporating a sport-specific stimuli such as an
opponent and alternating between leading (attacking) and
following (defending) through the use of mirror drills.
Variations
To improve movement solutions and create between-skill
variability and an adaptable performer, practitioners can vary
1503

the cutting techniques performed at the turning point during
preplanned and Y-shaped agility tasks. Alternative cuts include
the following:
Crossover cut. The athlete positions the plant foot on the
same side (ipsilateral) of the new direction (or sometimes
medially across the pelvic midline) and then crosses the
opposite leg (contralateral) in front of the body for the new
step in the new direction, accelerating in the same direction
of the push-off leg (35).
Split step cut. The athlete performs a small jump (amplitude
jump) before push-off, landing with both feet greater than or
equal to shoulder-width apart (not shown; it would come
after the second photo), and then, on landing, the
contralateral limb is used for push-off into the intended
direction of travel (35).
1504

  10   MULTIPLANAR ACCELERATION
INITIATION BOX DRILL
This drill requires starting movements to accelerate the athlete in a
new direction (i.e., forward, sideways, rearward).
Task
1505

The athlete starts in the center of a 5 × 5-yard or -meter box
and initiates an acceleration from a static position in a new
direction (i.e., forward, sideways, rearward) before decelerating
at the specific cone or zone. The athlete should begin
submaximally developing his or her ability to accelerate forward,
sideways, and rearward and practice a range of different
movements as outlined here:
Starting and accelerating forward (static initiation). Bilateral
to false step, two-point staggered, three-point stance,
prone, kneeling, supine, two-point staggered with torso
rotation
Starting and accelerating sideways (static initiation). Jab
step (side-step cut), split step (amplitude jump), shuffle
step, crossover or pivot, kneeling, two-point staggered with
torso rotation
Starting and accelerating rearward (static initiation). Pivot,
drop or pop turn, turns from nondominant and dominant
sides
1506

Progressions and Regressions
Multiplanar acceleration initiations to decelerations can be
further developed using generic and sport-specific stimuli. For
example, multiplanar acceleration initiation box drills can be
progressed whereby the athletes must react to an auditory or
visual stimulus when initiating their acceleration, such as a color
cone or auditory command (e.g., left, right, forward, rear left,
rear right) (figure a). The tasks can be further developed by
incorporating a sport-specific stimuli such as an opponent and
alternating 
between 
leading 
(attacking) 
and 
following
(defending) through the use of mirror drills whereby the
defender has to mirror and copy the initiation movement and
direction of travel (figure b).
1507

  11   EVASION DRILL
Task
Using a 10 × 10-yard (or -meter) box, the purpose of this open
drill from an attacking perspective is to create space, take
space, create separation, evade an opponent, and penetrate
defensive lines accurately and efficiently and entering a specific
end zone (e.g., 1v1 evasive drill with two gates). A range of
different COD actions, deceleration actions, or simply linear or
curvilinear speed actions could be performed to achieve the
objective. Conversely, from a defensive perspective, the aim is
to prevent the attacker from penetrating the defensive line and
entering the end zones, limiting space for the attacker,
potentially making a tag, or delaying the opponent. The
defender is encouraged to identify kinematic and postural cues
and anticipate and react to the opponent.
1508

Progressions and Regressions
A range of different mechanical and perceptual-cognitive factors
can be manipulated within agility drills, which can create
variation, new learning environments, and problems to solve
while also influencing the task complexity and cognitive loading,
which are summarized in table 20.7 (page 666). For example,
the pitch dimensions could be expanded (figure a), which can
increase the entry and exit velocities and momentums with a
variation in end zones for the attacker to target. To increase
game representativeness, the addition of static mannequins or
defenders can further replicate the chaotic environments that
are often encountered in sports such as American football
(figure b). Finally, most multidirectional sports have multiple
attackers and defenders; thus, to increase specificity, 2v2 small-
sided games (and other configurations) also can be used to
work on attacking and defensive transitions, organization, and
communication (figure c).
1509

KEY TERMS
acceleration
actualization
agility
backpedaling
backward running
braking impulse
braking phase
1510

change of direction
coordinative overload
deceleration
dynamic correspondence
force
ground contact time
ground preparation
impulse
impulse–momentum relationship
initiation
maneuverability
momentum
negative acceleration
perception–action coupling
perceptual-cognitive
periodization
propulsive phase
rate of force development (RFD)
recovery
scalar quantity
speed
spring–mass model (SMM)
sprinting
step frequency
step length
strength
stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
stride
transition
vector quantity
velocity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1511
