CHAPTER 21
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR AEROBIC
ENDURANCE AND METABOLIC
TRAINING
Glen B. Deakin, PhD, and Carwyn P.M. Sharp,
PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Benjamin H.
Reuter, J. Jay Dawes, and Patrick S. Hagerman to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss the factors related to aerobic endurance performance;
select the mode of aerobic endurance training;
set aerobic endurance training frequency based on training
status, sport season, and recovery requirements;
assign aerobic endurance training duration and understand its
interaction with training intensity;
assign aerobic endurance exercise intensity and understand the
various methods used to monitor intensity;
describe the various types of aerobic endurance programs;
1512

apply the program design variables based on the sport season;
and
address the issues of cross-training, detraining, tapering,
concurrent training, heat acclimation, and altitude when
designing an aerobic endurance training program.
This chapter discusses the general principles of program design as
they apply to aerobic endurance training and a stepwise approach to
designing a safe and effective program.
Improvements in aerobic endurance performance can be derived
only when sound principles are applied during training. While some
of the fundamental mechanisms responsible for inducing adaptations
during training are undefined, it is clear that in order to adapt, the
various systems and tissues of the body must be challenged by an
exercise stimulus (e.g., specificity and overload). The physiological
systems that are not involved during the training session or not
stressed sufficiently by exercise will not adapt to the training
program (5, 85).
Training specificity refers to the distinct adaptations to the
physiological systems that arise from the training program.
Moreover, a training effect is limited to the physiological systems
used and overloaded during training (140, 142). To improve aerobic
endurance performance, training programs must be designed to
enhance 
the 
function 
of 
the 
respiratory, 
cardiovascular,
musculoskeletal, and nervous systems.
For a training adaptation to occur, a physiological system must be
stressed at a level beyond which it is presently accustomed (105).
Following repeated and consistent overload, the physiological
systems of the body adapt to the exercise stress. Adaptations occur
until the tissues are no longer overloaded by the applied exercise
stress. This necessitates the use of a greater overload for continued
adaptations. Exercise frequency, duration, and intensity are the
variables most often manipulated to provide overload to the systems
and tissues of the body.
1513

Successful performance in aerobic endurance competitions
involving running, cycling, and swimming depends on athletes’ ability
to cover a fixed distance in the shortest time possible. This requires
athletes to be in peak physical and psychological condition for the
competition. To reach this level of performance, athletes must
consistently 
train 
hard, 
yet 
intelligently, 
to 
maximize 
the
physiological adaptations derived from training while avoiding injury
and overtraining. A commonly observed trend with aerobic
endurance athletes is to adopt and embrace the training practices of
highly successful or well-known athletes. Although this strategy may
be effective for a few, most aerobic endurance athletes would likely
be better served by constructing their own training regimen based
on a good working knowledge of sound training principles and an
understanding of their own individualized physical limitations and
needs. Another common belief is that greater overload via longer
duration, higher intensity, and greater frequency is required to
improve performance. However, training smarter by identifying
physiological, biomechanical, and performance strengths and
weaknesses (e.g., poor leg strength, muscle imbalances, low heat
tolerance) and working to consolidate strengths while correcting
weaknesses, has greater opportunities to improve performance
outcomes with lower risk of injuries. An extension of this principle is
applying the minimum effective dose (MED) (132, 133). MED
was originally used in the pharmaceutical industry to reflect the
understanding that there is a minimum dose of medication needed
to elicit the desired physiological response; the use of medications
results in varying side effects, and the higher the dose of
medication, the greater the side effects. In strength and
conditioning, this term has been adapted to applying the minimum
amount of training stimuli required to maximize adaptations while
simultaneously minimizing the damage and injury risks associated
with training. This concept has also been explored as the minimum
training dose needed to maintain the adaptations of resistance
training (126). In conjunction with MED, aerobic endurance coaches
1514

and athletes have also come to understand the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) or maximum effective dose (133). This can
be considered the maximum training workload that provides
measurable benefits to the athlete. However, as discussed earlier,
while still providing benefits, the side effects of MTD training stress
(e.g., tissue microtrauma and fatigue) are also relatively high, and
the risk–reward balance must be strongly considered.
This chapter is designed to provide the strength and conditioning
professional with a good working knowledge of the scientific
principles 
of 
aerobic 
endurance 
training 
and 
conditioning.
Specifically, this chapter includes information about the factors
related to performance, aerobic endurance training program design
variables, and various types of training programs. Additional
discussion focuses on sport season training and special issues
related to aerobic endurance training including concurrent training
(i.e., combining resistance and aerobic endurance training in one
training program) and heat acclimation. Because it would be
exhaustive to summarize all the relevant information about training
for all possible aerobic endurance sports, only foundational aerobic
endurance training topics are presented, with specific examples as
they relate to running, cycling, and swimming.
1515

Factors Related to Aerobic Endurance
Performance
When designing aerobic endurance training programs, it is important
to understand those factors that influence and play a significant role
in successful aerobic endurance performance. This allows for the
development 
of 
sound 
training 
programs 
while 
minimizing
unnecessary 
training 
that 
may 
lead 
to 
counterproductive
adaptations, fatigue, injury, or overtraining.
Maximal Aerobic Capacity
As the duration of the aerobic endurance event increases, so does
the proportion of the total energy demand that must be met by
aerobic metabolism. Therefore, high maximal aerobic capacity
(V̇O2max) is necessary for success in aerobic endurance events
(87). A high correlation has been shown to exist between V̇O2max
and performance in aerobic endurance events (2, 3, 134, 87).
Consequently, aerobic endurance training programs should be
designed, in part, to improve V̇O2max. However, although a high
V̇O2max is important for successful performance, other factors may
be equally or even more important. These factors include a high
lactate threshold, good exercise economy, high efficiency in using fat
as a fuel source, and a high percentage of type I muscle fibers.
For well-trained aerobic endurance athletes, improving V̇O2max
may benefit performance only up to a certain point, especially since
these individuals typically already possess excellent aerobic capacity.
Consequently, the ability to sustain higher velocities during
competition and training may have a greater impact on performance
than attempting to make marginal improvements in aerobic capacity.
For this reason, many athletes use high-intensity interval training
(HIIT). HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endurance athletes via improvements in peak power output,
1516

ventilatory threshold, hydrogen ion buffering, use of fat as a fuel
source, and improved exercise economy (76).
Lactate Threshold
In aerobic endurance events, the best competitor among athletes
with similar V̇O2max values is typically the person who can sustain
aerobic energy production at the highest percentage of his or her
V̇O2max without accumulating large amounts of lactic acid in the
muscle and blood (74). Although numerous terms have been used to
refer to this phenomenon, lactate threshold (LT) is the one most
commonly employed in the literature. Lactate threshold is that speed
of movement or percentage of V̇O2max at which a specific blood
lactate concentration is observed (i.e., 4 mmol/L of blood) or the
point at which blood lactate concentration begins to increase above
resting levels (136). Several studies have shown that an athlete’s LT
appears to be a better indicator of his or her aerobic endurance
performance than V̇O2max (7, 113). The maximal lactate steady
state (MLSS) is another term that often appears in the aerobic
endurance training literature. The MLSS is defined as the exercise
intensity at which maximal lactate production is equal to maximal
lactate clearance within the body (14). MLSS is an indicator of the
transition from heavy to severe exercise intensity (70). In other
words, while lactate production increases at the onset of exercise in
the heavy exercise intensity domain, it plateaus and can be
maintained at a steady state at this elevated level. However, if
exercise intensity increases further, now entering the severe domain,
lactate increases continually until failure. Notably, MLSS is also
synonymous with critical power (CP) and critical speed (CS) in this
regard. The MLSS is considered by many to be a better indicator of
aerobic endurance performance than either V̇O2max or the LT (14).
What is clear from this information is that aerobic endurance
athletes must improve their LT and MLSS. This requires athletes to
conduct some training at elevated levels of blood and muscle lactate
to maximize training improvements in these areas.
1517

Exercise Economy
A measure of the energy cost of activity at a given exercise velocity
is referred to as exercise economy. Athletes with a high exercise
economy expend less energy during exercise to maintain a given
exercise velocity (e.g., running speed). Several investigators have
suggested that exercise economy is an important factor in successful
performance in running events (71), with better performers also
having a slightly shorter stride length and greater stride frequency
compared to less successful performers (106). During cycling,
exercise economy can be affected by body mass size, cycling
velocity, and aerodynamic positioning (7, 41, 42). For cyclists, an
increase in body mass and cycling velocity as well as an inefficient
body position generate greater wind resistance, resulting in a
decrease in exercise economy. It has been demonstrated that elite
swimmers are much more economical than non-elite swimmers (6)
and use less oxygen at any given swimming velocity. The most
profound impact on exercise economy during swimming can be
observed when swimming technique becomes more efficient. As
improvements in stroke mechanics occur, energy demand for a given
swimming velocity is reduced (146). Training to improve exercise
economy is critical for aerobic endurance athletes.
An improvement in exercise economy can enhance
maximal 
aerobic 
capacity 
(V̇O2max) 
and 
lactate
threshold.
1518

Designing an Aerobic Endurance
Program
An effective aerobic endurance training program must include an
exercise prescription specifically developed for the individual athlete
based on his or her individual strengths and weaknesses, goals, and
sport. This requires manipulation of the primary program design
variables. The sidebar lists the design variables as steps 1 through 5.
Unfortunately, strength and conditional professionals and athletes
often use the training practices or programs of current successful
strength and conditional professionals or athletes in their sport. This
does not carefully consider the strengths and weaknesses of the
athlete and may lead to development of an ineffective or potentially
harmful training program. The optimal development of a safe and
effective training program is to have the factors related to aerobic
endurance performance evaluated and then use that information to
generate a training program specific to the athlete. For example, an
athlete with poor exercise economy should place a greater emphasis
on training to improve exercise economy compared to other factors
that are known strengths. This might include HIIT with a focus on
technique, as well as using long rest periods. Conversely, athletes
who need to increase LT might consider performing more high-
intensity training with shorter rest periods.
Aerobic Training Program Design Variables
Step 1: Exercise mode
Step 2: Training frequency
Step 3: Training intensity
Step 4: Exercise duration
Step 5: Exercise progression
1519

Training programs for female athletes do not have to be different
from those used to train male athletes; evidence indicates that
males and females respond similarly to training programs (12, 78).
Refer to chapter 8 for a discussion on sex-related differences and
their implications for exercise.
Step 1: Exercise Mode
Exercise mode refers to the specific activity performed by the
athlete: cycling, running, swimming, and so on. When training to
improve aerobic endurance performance, the athlete should select
activities that mimic as closely as possible the movement pattern
employed in competition. This will cause positive adaptations in
specific physiological systems and tissues of the body related to
those used during competition. For example, the recruitment of
specific muscle fibers and the adaptation of the energy systems
within those fibers must be challenged during aerobic endurance
training. Selecting the appropriate exercise mode during training
ensures that the systems used in competition are challenged to
improve. Note that the more specific the training mode is to the
sport, the greater the improvement in performance is likely to be
experienced. For an athlete involved in multiple aerobic endurance
sports, or one who is interested in a general aerobic endurance
fitness program, cross-training or participation in multiple aerobic
endurance activities may be warranted (47).
Step 2: Training Frequency
Training frequency refers to the number of training sessions
conducted per day or per week. The frequency of training sessions
depends on an interaction of exercise intensity and duration, the
training status of the athlete, and the specific phase of the sport
(e.g., preparation phase or preseason versus competition phase or
in-season). Higher exercise intensity and longer duration may
necessitate less frequent training to allow sufficient recovery from
exercise sessions. The training status of the athlete can influence
1520

training frequency, with lesser-trained athletes requiring more
recovery days at the beginning of a training period than more highly
trained athletes. The sport phase or season that the athlete is
currently in can also influence training frequency; an off-season
program may include three to four training days per week, but
training frequency may progress to daily workouts (or even multiple
workouts per day for triathletes and highly competitive distance
runners) in the preseason. Additionally, fewer training sessions may
be required to maintain an achieved level of physiological function or
performance than to attain that level initially (128). Appropriate
training frequency is important for the aerobic endurance athlete,
because too much training may increase the risk of injury, illness, or
overtraining (i.e., maximum tolerable dose). While some evidence
shows a positive relationship between exercise frequency and
increased injury rates (63), these studies used active individuals in a
wide age range, not only young and healthy athletes, as subjects.
Additional research has shown injuries are multifactorial and there is
insufficient evidence definitively associating injuries with increases or
high levels of training frequency, volume, or other training factors
(44). Conversely, too little training will not result in positive
adaptations to the various systems of the body (i.e., below the
minimum effective dose). Research has shown that it is necessary to
train more than twice per week in order to increase V̇O2max (138).
Many strength and conditioning professionals recognize that multiple
training sessions per day may be needed to improve performance in
some aerobic endurance athletes. For athletes participating in single-
discipline sports such as running, such training practices should be
reserved for those with an advanced or elite training status due to
the level of physiological stress involved with such programs.
Research conducted by Hansen and colleagues (58) showed that
time to exhaustion, resting muscle glycogen concentrations, and
citrate synthase activity increased among seven healthy untrained
men after 10 weeks of training twice every other day versus once
daily. It was speculated that training in a glycogen-depleted state
1521

may further increase glycogen resynthesis via an increase in the
transcription and transcription rate of certain genes responsible for
training adaptations. However, the researchers cautioned that these
results should not necessarily be used by strength and conditioning
professionals and practitioners to guide practice, because low
glycogen concentrations may reduce the period of time an athlete is
able to train and may increase risk of overtraining. This is one
reason why it is important to monitor the effects of the training load
on athletes. Further, strength and conditioning professionals and
athletes need to understand that adaptation takes place during
periods of rest, and undertaking more frequent training can affect
the recovery process and, ultimately, the level of adaptation.
Recovery from individual training sessions is essential if the
athlete is to derive maximum benefits from the subsequent training
session. Exercise performance has been shown to improve following
relative rest from difficult training sessions (16). Obtaining sufficient
rest, becoming rehydrated, and restoring fuel sources are critical
issues for the athlete during recovery. Physical and mental relaxation
and avoidance of strenuous physical activity are particularly
important following days of high-intensity or long-duration training.
Postexercise ingestion of adequate fluids and electrolytes is
important for replacing those lost during training. If the training
session was especially long or intense, postexercise carbohydrate
intake is important for replacing the muscle and liver glycogen stores
that were likely depleted, as is the ingestion of protein to aid muscle
repair and recovery. More detailed information on this topic can be
found in chapter 11.
Evidence suggests that while most aerobic endurance athletes
across a variety of sports (e.g., cycling, running, walking, triathlon)
use nutrition, hydration, stretching, and active recovery, other forms
of recovery (e.g., compression garments and ice baths) are not used
as frequently or at all (13, 19). In addition, while many athletes
believe in the benefits of different recovery strategies for
competition, such as active recovery, self-massage, and massage,
1522

they do not actually use them (19). Research has further elucidated
that elite athletes are more likely to use all forms of recovery, except
cold water immersion, than lower tiered well-trained athletes (13).
The use of or lack of use of different strategies has been found to be
related to coach and athlete awareness of the effectiveness of such
strategies (13). Further, the majority of athlete information and
recommendations about recovery strategies comes from coaches
and fellow athletes rather than peer-reviewed scientific publications
(19). Therefore, to maximize recovery, and aid performance, it is
important that coaches and athletes are educated and up to date on
the types of recovery strategies that have been shown in multiple
scientific publications to be effective, available, and best suited to
athletes in training and competition.
With regards to recovery and training, the term recovery
run/ride/swim, which is often used by aerobic endurance athletes to
reflect an easy run, ride, or swim after competition, or a training
session during the training cycle, must be clarified. Typically, a
recovery session would fall under the banner of active recovery,
which relates to low-intensity physical activities designed to facilitate
recovery from the metabolic responses of exercise fatigue (72). A
recovery session should be just that: a session with the intentional
purpose of aiding recovery beyond that achievable via passive rest,
which research indicates it does (40). It is not designed to provide
an extra training stimulus and definitely should not contribute to any
further muscle damage. Therefore, the recovery session should be
short in duration and of a low intensity (i.e., zone 1 ([table 21.1]).
Consequently, an extensive aerobic endurance session or long, slow
distance session should not be used as a recovery run, just because
it is of a low intensity. However, even though recovery sessions
should not be considered as a training stimulus, they do contribute
to the total amount of exercise completed in a training cycle and
therefore must be included in all training plans for monitoring and
recovery purposes (36).
1523

TABLE 21.1  Example of a Five-Zone Intensity Scale
to Prescribe and Monitor Training of Aerobic
Endurance Athletes
Intensity
zone
V̇O2 (%
max)
Heart rate
(% max)
Lactate
(mmol/L)
Typical accumulated
duration within zone
1
50-60
60-72
0.8-1.5
1-6 h
2
66-80
72-82
1.5-2.5
1-3 h
3
81-87
82-87
2.5-4.0
50-90 min
4
88-93
88-92
4.0-6.0
30-60 min
5
94-100
93-100
6.0-10.0
15-30 min
This scale is typical of intensity zone scales used for aerobic endurance training
prescription and monitoring. The scale was developed by the Norwegian Olympic
Federation as a general guideline based on years of testing of cross-country skiers, rowers,
and biathletes.
Reprinted by permission from S. Seiler, “What is Best Practice for Training Intensity and
Duration Distribution in Endurance Athletes?” International Journal of Sports Physiology
and Performance 5 (2010): 277.
Step 3: Training Intensity
Central to causing training adaptations in the body is the interaction
of training intensity and duration. Generally, the higher the exercise
intensity, the shorter the exercise duration. Adaptations in the body
are specific to the intensity, or effort expended during a training
session. High-intensity aerobic exercise increases cardiovascular and
respiratory function and allows for improved oxygen delivery to the
working muscles (105). Increasing exercise intensity may also
benefit skeletal muscle adaptations by affecting muscle fiber
recruitment (85). As exercise intensity is increased, greater
recruitment of type II muscle fibers occurs to meet the increased
power needs. This training stimulus allows those fibers to become
more aerobically trained, thereby potentially improving overall
aerobic performance.
The regulation of exercise intensity is critical to the success of
each training session and ultimately the entire program. An exercise
1524

intensity that is too low does not stress the body’s systems and
induce the desired physiological adaptations, whereas an intensity
that is too high results in excessive fatigue and a premature end to
the training session. In either instance, the training session will be
poor and ineffective.
The most accurate methods for regulating exercise intensity are
to monitor oxygen consumption during exercise to determine its
percentage of V̇O2max and to periodically measure blood lactate
concentration to determine the relationship to LT. If V̇O2max
monitoring is not available, exercise prescriptions can use heart rate,
ratings of perceived exertion, metabolic equivalents (in clinical
populations), or exercise velocity to monitor exercise intensity.
Power-measuring devices are also frequently used by elite and top-
level amateur competitors, especially in cycling.
Heart Rate
Heart rate is likely the most frequently used method for prescribing
aerobic exercise intensity. The reason is the close relationship
between heart rate and oxygen consumption, especially when the
intensity is between 50% and 90% of functional capacity
(V̇O2max), also called heart rate reserve (HRR). HRR is the
difference between an athlete’s maximal heart rate and their resting
heart rate (24). The most common means of regulating intensity
using this method is to determine the specific heart rate associated
with the desired percentage of V̇O2max or the heart rate associated
with the LT. For the greatest precision, this necessitates laboratory
testing to identify these exercise intensities. If laboratory testing is
unavailable, the individual’s age-predicted maximal heart rate
(APMHR) is often used as the basis for determining exercise
intensity. While there are numerous APMHR equations, all of which
are estimates and have been shown to have varying degrees of bias,
the Fox equation (APMHR = 220 - age) appears less prone to under-
and overestimation of HRmax in the general population (123). It is
important to note, however, that the Fox equation is also susceptible
1525

to individual variability with regards to its accuracy, having a
documented standard deviation of 10 to 12 beats per minute (123).
Refer to the sidebar Target Heart Rate Calculations for formulas and
sample calculations for determining aerobic endurance exercise
heart rate ranges using the Karvonen method and the
percentage of maximal heart rate (MHR) method. The
relationship between V̇O2max, HRR, and MHR is shown in table 21.2.
TABLE 21.2 Relationship Between V̇O2max, Heart
Rate Reserve (HRR), and Maximal Heart Rate (MHR)
% V̇O2max
% HRR
% MHR
50
50
66
55
55
70
60
60
74
65
65
77
70
70
81
75
75
85
80
80
88
85
85
92
90
90
96
95
95
98
100
100
100
Although the Karvonen and percentage of maximal heart rate
formulas provide practical intensity assignments, basing them on
APMHR will entail some inaccuracies (vs. laboratory-tested maximal
heart rates) when exercise intensity is monitored (73). It has been
determined that age contributes significantly to the variability in
maximal heart rate; however, the effects of other factors such as
mode of exercise and fitness level must also be considered with the
use of heart rate to monitor intensity (73). Changes in fitness over
1526

time must also be taken into account when prescribing exercise. As
aerobic power (V̇O2max), LT, MLSS, and exercise economy improve,
the prescribed absolute intensity will be a lower relative intensity,
resulting in a lower stress and stimulus. As such, corresponding
adjustments must be made to increase training intensity to maintain
a stimulus that will elicit continuing and sustainable adaptations. To
provide 
accurate 
information 
on 
the 
magnitude 
of 
these
improvements in aerobic fitness, and to inform subsequent
adjustments in training intensity, it is important to test athletes
regularly in each of these factors. Refer to chapters 13 and 14 for
information on selecting, administering, and scoring appropriate
validated field and laboratory tests. Additionally, using estimations of
exercise intensity via estimated maximal heart rate equations
provides no information about the intensity associated with the LT.
Without some knowledge of an athlete’s LT, achieved from field or
laboratory testing, a highly effective aerobic endurance training
program cannot be developed.
Target Heart Rate Calculations
Karvonen Method
Formula
Age-predicted maximum heart rate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Heart rate reserve (HRR) = APMHR - resting heart rate (RHR)
Target heart rate (THR) = (HRR × exercise intensity) + RHR
To determine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensity values.
Example
A 30-year-old athlete with an RHR of 60 beats per minute is assigned an exercise
intensity of 60% to 70% of functional capacity:
APMHR = 220 - 30 = 190 beats/min
RHR = 60 beats/min
HRR = 190 - 60 = 130 beats/min
1527

Lowest number of the athlete’s THRR = (130 × 0.60) + 60 = 78 + 60 = 138
beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’s THRR = (130 × 0.70) + 60 = 91 + 60 = 151
beats/min
Percentage of Maximal Heart Rate Method
Formula
Age-predicted maximum heart rate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Target heart rate (THR) = (APMHR × exercise intensity)
To determine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensity values.
Example
A 20-year-old athlete is assigned an exercise intensity of 70% to 85% of maximal
heart rate:
APMHR = 220 - 20 = 200 beats/min
Lowest number of the athlete’s THRR = 200 × 0.70 = 140 beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’s THRR = 200 × 0.85 = 170 beats/min
It is also important to note that environmental factors such as
heat, humidity, and altitude place additional stresses on the body,
affecting the cardiovascular responses to exercise (68, 117). As
such, the acute and chronic effects of these external factors in
elevating heart rate should be taken into account when prescribing
and monitoring exercise intensity.
Ratings of Perceived Exertion Scales
Ratings of perceived exertion (RPE) scales also can be used to
regulate and monitor intensity during aerobic endurance training.
Evidence suggests that RPE can be used to accurately regulate
intensity when there are changes in fitness level (29); however,
researchers have demonstrated that the RPE–intensity relationship
can be influenced by various external environmental factors such as
passive distracters and environmental temperature (93, 130).
According to Haddad, Padula, and Chamari (56), various subject
characteristics such as age, sex, training status, and fitness level
1528

may influence RPE. Furthermore, a few environmental factors that
may influence RPE are listening to music, watching television or
video, 
environmental 
temperature, 
altitude, 
nutritional
considerations, and external feedback. However, these authors
suggest that despite the potential influence of these factors, RPE is
still a valid monitoring tool (table 21.3).
TABLE 21.3 Sample Rating of Perceived Exertion
(RPE) Scale
Rating
Description
1
Nothing at all (lying down)
2
Extremely little
3
Very easy
4
Easy (could do this all day)
5
Moderate
6
Somewhat hard (starting to feel it)
7
Hard
8
Very hard (making an effort to keep up)
9
Very, very hard
10
Maximum effort (cannot go any further)
Metabolic Equivalents
Metabolic equivalents may also be used to prescribe exercise
intensity. One metabolic equivalent (MET) is equal to 3.5 ml ·
kg−1 · min−1 of oxygen consumption and is considered the amount of
oxygen required by the body at rest (3). Metabolic equivalent values
have been determined for a variety of physical activities; an activity
with a MET value of 10.0 requires 10 times the oxygen uptake that is
required by an individual at rest. Assigning MET values as part of an
aerobic exercise prescription requires the strength and conditioning
professional to know (or estimate) an athlete’s maximal oxygen
1529

uptake to be able to calculate an exercise MET level. However, the
use of METs in exercise prescription is typically limited to clinical
populations.
Intensity Measuring Technology
Previously due to cost, power devices for cycling such as power
measuring cranks and hubs to monitor exercise intensity were
mostly only used by professionals and top-level amateurs. Research
has supported their use from the perspective of demonstrating that
they provide valid and reliable power measurement (49). However,
due to the advancements in technology, it is common to see athletes
of all levels using technology to monitor exercise intensity. This
technology ranges from smart watches to running stride power
meters to power measuring cranks. Each technology has its own
reasons for being selected. For example, using power measuring
cranks in cycling has an advantage over other measures because
metabolic rate is closely related to mechanical power production
(30). Also, using power as an intensity measure allows reproducible
intensity efforts regardless of environmental conditions, which may
influence other measures of intensity such as heart rate and velocity
(30). Irrespective of the technology selected to monitor power,
speed, or similar variables, they should have training zones allocated
to them that reflect the athlete’s training status.
Technology also extends to advanced indoor trainers such as
treadmills, rowers, and ski and cycle ergometers. Due to the large
variety of technological devices currently available, it is not possible
to address each manufacturer individually. However, some common
points to consider are whether the measurements of power, speed,
stride length, stride frequency, and the like are valid, accurate, and
reliable. While a number of these commonly used devices have been
research tested, many have not. Hence, it is important to review the
product before buying. Also, given the number of variables that can
be measured, it is important to set training intensity or target ranges
before 
using 
them. 
Additionally, 
strength 
and 
conditioning
1530

professionals must understand what each variable actually reflects,
how to interpret it, and how it may change with respect to the
training prescribed.
Similarly, while an athlete may be familiar with technology, it does
not mean they are used to the specific device measuring their
performance, and as such, a familiarization period may be required.
For example, it can feel foreign to run on a treadmill (active, passive,
or Alter-G) when one has not done so before. As such, coaching
cues need to be developed and provided to the athlete to ensure he
or she transitions successfully to the new technology or device. It
also should be noted that variances in technology between indoor
and outdoor equipment or differences in performance between
exercising indoors versus outdoors exist and can produce differing
results (90). For example, it has been shown that running inside on
a treadmill at slower speeds can feel easier and produce a lower
exercise heart rate than running outside at higher submaximal
speeds (90). Aerobic endurance performance was also found to be
superior outside compared to when performed indoors. The
researchers suggest this may be related to a potential fear of falling
from the treadmill at higher speeds and the potential build-up of
heat due to the absence of air flow around the body when running
indoors.
Training Zones
It is common practice in aerobic sports to prescribe exercise within
one of a number of training zones, each of which reflects a training
intensity and training goal, rather than a specific heart rate or RPE
(62, 120). The number of zones can vary, typically from three to
seven; however, the common reference point is often the athlete’s
lactate or ventilatory threshold. A low-intensity or aerobic training
zone can be associated with a stable blood lactate concentration
below 2 mmol/L with one or more high-intensity or anaerobic
training zones above 4 mmol/L, and lactate threshold training can be
seen as attaining and maintaining steady state lactate levels in the
1531

zone between 2 mmol/L and 4 mmol/L (120). Figure 21.1 and table
21.1 (page 697) illustrate examples of three and five zone training
models respectively.
FIGURE 21.1 A three-intensity zone model based on identification of ventilatory
thresholds. LT = lactate threshold; MLSS = maximal lactate steady state; mM = mmol/L.
Step 4: Exercise Duration
Exercise duration refers to the length of time of the training
session. The duration of a training session is often influenced by the
exercise intensity: the longer the exercise duration, the lower the
exercise intensity. For example, exercise that is conducted at an
intensity above the maximal lactate steady state (e.g., 85% of
V̇O2max) will have a relatively short duration (20-30 min) because
the accumulation of lactate within the muscle will contribute to
fatigue. Conversely, exercise that is performed at a much lower
intensity (e.g., 70% of V̇O2max) may be performed for several hours
before the athlete experiences fatigue.
1532

The duration of a training session is often influenced by
the exercise intensity; the longer the exercise duration,
the lower the exercise intensity.
Step 5: Exercise Progression
Once athletes begin an aerobic endurance exercise program, they
need to continue training to either maintain or advance their aerobic
fitness level. However, research indicates that aerobic fitness does
not decrease for up to five weeks when frequency decreases to as
few as two times per week as long as training intensity is maintained
(126).
Increasing 
aerobic 
endurance 
fitness 
requires 
program
progression, which initially involves increasing the frequency,
intensity, and duration of exercise. Typically, for the general
population, it is recommended that from week to week within a
longer-term training plan, exercise frequency, intensity, or duration
should not increase more than 10% each week to avoid overtraining
or injury (57). While 10% may not seem like a significant increase,
when these increases and their associated adaptations are added
over a longer period of months and years, the adaptations and
performance improvements are substantial and achieved while
minimizing the risks of injury and overtraining. However, for athletes
preparing for long-distance events, and especially those starting
from a low fitness level, it may be necessary to adjust this guideline
for a small number of weeks within the larger training plan. It should
be noted that if an increase in training volume above 10% is
implemented, it is critical that before doing so monitoring systems
for physical and psychological overtraining symptoms are determined
and implemented on a regular basis to recognize indications of
overtraining and possible injury early on. For example, a cyclist
riding 68 miles per week across three sessions may increase their
18-mile tempo and 18-mile interval sessions by 10%, thereby
increasing each session by about 2 miles. Given the relatively high
intensity of these training sessions, this would be appropriate.
1533

However, to only increase the remaining extensive endurance
session of 32 miles by 10% would only result in an increase of about
3 miles or, assuming they ride at an average of 18 miles per hour, an
increase of 10 minutes, from 1 hour 46 minutes to 1 hour 56
minutes. Instead, given the low impact and intensity of exercise and
the time involved, the duration of this extensive endurance ride may
reasonably and safely be extended by 15 to 20 minutes (i.e., about 6
miles), which would equate to an increase of approximately 20%.
But, as stated previously, this increase above the recommended 10%
should be done cautiously, with injury and overtraining monitoring
systems implemented, and only for a short period of time with an
appropriate increase in recovery time and techniques reflective of
the increased stress on the body. This type of planned increase in
training frequency, intensity, or duration may be referred to as short-
term functional overreaching.
An important point regarding training duration progression is that
it is often recommended to use predicted time to set the duration of
a training session rather than distance. This is because training time
factors in the effects of terrain and environmental conditions,
whereas distance does not. For example, if an athlete runs 10 miles
over a flat course in 1 hour and 10 minutes, and then runs a hilly
11-mile course the following week in a much slower time of 1 hour
and 58 minutes, even though the prescribed distance only increased
by 10%, the time taken was considerably greater (+48 minutes =
65% increase) which is too much for a week-to-week progression.
Consequently, discretion needs to be used with respect to which
training variable is increased and by how much. Further, to again
avoid symptoms of overtraining or injury, only one training variable
should be increased at a time.
Progression of training frequency may be limited by constraints
such as school, work, and family commitments. It may not be
possible for the athlete to train every day or to incorporate more
than one training session each day. The duration of each training
session is limited by the same constraints. In these cases, to elicit
1534

further adaptations, a greater reliance on manipulating training
intensity exists. Note that as the athlete’s level of fitness changes
over the course of the sport seasons, training intensity levels (e.g.,
heart rate range for a given training zone) must be adjusted.
Similarly, as the training environment changes (e.g., from cool to hot
and humid), RPE charts may be particularly helpful for monitoring
intensity in addition to heart rate, which will be elevated by the
increased physiologic demands induced by the environmental
conditions. In conjunction with these points, progression of training
frequency, intensity, and duration, along with recovery, should be
monitored at all times to ensure appropriate periods of loading and
unloading are applied, and signs or symptoms of overreaching or
overtraining are detected early. More detailed information on these
topics can be found in chapter 24.
1535

Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Programs
Several types of aerobic endurance training programs exist, each
with varying frequency, intensity, duration, and progression
parameters. Each type incorporates the five design variables and
results in regimens created for specific outcomes. Table 21.4
summarizes the types of aerobic endurance training and their
common prescriptive guidelines. Sample training programs for each
type of aerobic endurance training are included after the sections
that follow.
TABLE 21.4 Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Training type
Frequency per
week*
Duration (work
bout portion)
Intensity
Extensive
endurance
1-2
Race distance or
longer (~30-120
min)
≤65% of V̇O2max
Pace/tempo
1-2
~20-30 min
At the LT; at or slightly
above race pace
Interval
1-2
3-5 min (with a
work:rest ratio of
1:1)
Close to V̇O2max
High-intensity
interval training
1
30-90 s (with a
work:rest ratio of
1:5)
Greater than V̇O2max
Fartlek
1
~20-60 min
Varies between LSD and
pace/tempo training
intensities
*The other days of the week are composed of other training types and rest or recovery
days or sessions.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1536

Extensive Endurance Training
Many aerobic endurance coaches and athletes over the years have
used the term long, slow distance (LSD) or high-volume training
to reflect training for a long period of time at a slow pace. However,
this term can give the wrong impression of what an athlete is
actually trying to achieve—that is, to extend their aerobic endurance
capabilities, not just exercise slowly for a long duration. Hence, the
term extensive endurance training is a more appropriate term
and the one used in this text. Irrespective of the term used, a
common factor with extensive endurance training is that the training
distance should be greater than race distance, or the duration should
be at least as long as 30 minutes to 2 hours (98). However, as the
race distance increases, it is not practical to complete an extensive
endurance training session greater than the race distance. For
example, because of the level of fatigue and tissue damage, it is not
recommended for athletes to run 26 miles (42 km) or greater in
training before running a marathon. What the athlete relies on in
this situation is a combination of his or her extensive endurance runs
plus the accumulation of the training volume over the weeks of
training before the event. The length of an extensive endurance
session will vary according to the training status of the athlete,
where the athlete is in the program, the mode of exercise (e.g.,
cycling vs. running), as well as the duration of the aerobic endurance
event for which he or she is training. Generally, as the distance
increases from a short (e.g., 5,000 m) to a long (e.g., 26.2-mile
marathon) or ultradistance aerobic endurance event, the concept of
running the race distance or greater becomes less likely and
unnecessary. However, it also should be noted that doing greater
than the race distance at the lower end of the aerobic endurance
distances (e.g., 5,000 m, 10,000 m, or short-distance triathlons) can
be beneficial and is often undertaken.
An extensive endurance training session is typically completed at
an intensity equivalent to training zone two (refer to table 21.1 on
page 697). This intensity is typically characterized as “conversation”
1537

exercise, with the athlete able to talk without undue respiratory
distress, or at a speed that the athlete feels they could run
indefinitely. In general, increases in duration are prioritized when
programming extensive endurance training sessions into a training
program. It is important to not substantially increase the speed of
the extensive endurance sessions in combination with increases in
session duration, for as speed increases the stress of the session
also increases, which in turn lengthens the posttraining recovery
time and therefore can also increase the risk of overtraining or
injury. The physiological benefits derived from extensive endurance
training 
primarily 
include 
enhanced 
cardiovascular 
and
thermoregulatory 
function, 
improved 
mitochondrial 
energy
production and oxidative capacity of skeletal muscle, and increased
use of fat as a fuel (15, 20, 64, 75, 83, 85, 96, 104, 136, 140, 142).
These changes are likely to improve the LT intensity by enhancing
the body’s ability to clear lactate. Chronic use of this type of training
also causes a change in the metabolic characteristics of the involved
muscles (27) and an eventual shift of type IIx fibers to type I fibers
(103, 124).
The increase in fat use also causes a sparing of the body’s limited
muscle glycogen reserves (60, 64, 69, 136). The intensity during
extensive endurance training is lower than the intensity used during
competition. However, extensive endurance training does not
stimulate the neurological patterns of muscle fiber recruitment that
are required during a race (136), and this may result in adaptations
in muscle fibers that are not used during competition.
Aerobic endurance training should not be based solely on
extensive endurance training but be combined with other training
methods such as interval and pace/tempo training to train race pace
endurance, and improve LT and exercise economy, thereby ensuring
a complete aerobic endurance-trained athlete. Even elite distance
running athletes recognize the benefit of this practice, running
approximately 80% of total running distance at extensive endurance
pace over the training year but also incorporating various other
1538

types of speed training (59). This ensures the athlete is not only
more aerobically efficient and has muscular endurance but also has
race speed capabilities. It is also worth noting that extensive
endurance sessions provide athletes with mental strength and
stamina by experiencing extended periods of time exercising, which
they will encounter on race day.
Pace/Tempo Training
Pace/tempo training employs an intensity at or slightly higher
than 
race 
competition 
intensity. 
The 
intensity 
corresponds
approximately to the maximal lactate steady state; therefore, this
type of training is also often called threshold training or aerobic–
anaerobic interval training (98). There are two ways to conduct
pace/tempo 
training: 
steady 
and 
intermittent 
(98). 
Steady
pace/tempo training is continuous training conducted at an intensity
equal to the maximal lactate steady state for durations of
approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The purpose of pace/tempo training
is to stress the athlete at a specific intensity and improve energy
production from both oxidative and nonoxidative metabolism.
Intermittent pace/tempo training is also referred to as tempo
intervals, cruise intervals, or threshold training (98). During
intermittent pace/tempo training, the intensity is the same as for a
steady-threshold workout, but the training session consists of a
series of shorter intervals with brief recovery periods between work
intervals. During pace/tempo training, it is important to avoid
exercising at a higher intensity than the prescribed pace, assuming
the prescribed pace is an accurate reflection of maximal lactate
steady state. If the workout seems relatively easy, it is better to
increase the distance than to increase the intensity. The primary
objective for this type of training is to develop a sense of race pace
and enhance the body systems’ ability to sustain exercise at that
pace. Pace/tempo training involves the same pattern of muscle fiber
recruitment as is required in competition. The benefits derived from
1539

this type of training include improved running economy and
increased LT and MLSS.
Interval Training
Interval training involves exercise at intensities close to V̇O2max.
The work intervals should last between 3 and 5 minutes, although
they can be as short as 30 seconds (3). The rest intervals for 3- to
5-minute work intervals should be equal to the work interval,
thereby keeping the work-to-rest ratio (W:R) at 1:1. Interval training
permits the athlete to train at intensities close to V̇O2max for a
greater amount of time than would be possible in a single exercise
session at a continuous high intensity. This type of training should
not be performed until a firm base of aerobic endurance training has
been attained (74). Interval training is very stressful on the athlete
and should be used sparingly. The benefits derived from interval
training include an increased V̇O2max and enhanced anaerobic
metabolism.
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) is a form of training that
uses repeated high-intensity exercise bouts above MLSS or critical
V̇O2 interspersed with brief recovery periods (76). One high-intensity
interval training protocol is Tabata training. This methodology
requires athletes to train at an intensity high enough to result in
exhaustion after 7 to 8 repetitions of 20 seconds of work with 10
seconds rest between exercise periods (129). HIIT has been shown
to provide a number of benefits to aerobic endurance performance
in recreational to well-trained athletes (53, 92, 137). Research has
shown that HIIT may result in increases in V̇O2max in beginner (137)
and trained athletes (92); however, in well-trained athletes the
results are less clear (97). The observed improvements may be, at
least in part, the result of increases in mitochondrial biogenesis and
function contributing to increased aerobic metabolism (67, 79). HIIT
has also been associated with improvements in LT (48, 92) and
1540

exercise economy (48, 53), which have both been strongly
associated with aerobic endurance performance. In cases where
improvements in aerobic endurance performance or factors
associated with this performance are similar from HIIT and
traditional low-intensity aerobic training, HIIT provides an advantage
by taking significantly less time to complete (23).
According to Buchheit and Laursen (22), for an optimal stimulus it
is necessary for athletes to spend a total of several minutes within
the HIIT session above 90% of the V̇O2max. Both short (<45 s) and
long (2- to 4-min) HIIT intervals can be used to elicit different
training responses. For example, shorter intervals with higher
intensity may elicit positive changes in neuromuscular power and
exercise economy, and as the work duration for a single exercise
bout is increased, the energy contribution from fast glycolysis will
likely increase along with blood lactate levels, which may stimulate
improvements in lactate metabolism.
In performing HIIT, the appropriate amount of rest between
repetitions is critical. If the relief intervals are too short, the athlete
will be unable to put forth a quality effort on subsequent exercise
bouts and also will be at a greater risk for injury. If the rest periods
are too long, many of the benefits experienced from challenging the
glycolytic energy system will likely diminish. An example of an
appropriate work-to-rest ratio for long-interval HIIT training is ≥2 to
3 minutes at or above 90% V̇O2max, with ≤2 minutes of passive or
low-intensity active recovery (21, 22, 77).
Fartlek Training
Fartlek training (the word Fartlek originates from the Swedish
term for speed play) is a combination of several of the previously
mentioned types of training. Although Fartlek training is generally
associated with running, it can also be used for cycling and
swimming. A sample Fartlek run involves easy running (~70%
V̇O2max) combined with either hill work or short, fast bursts of
running (~85-90% V̇O2max) for short time periods. Athletes can
1541

apply this basic format to cycling and swimming by simply combining
extensive endurance training, pace/tempo training, and interval
training. A Fartlek training workout challenges all systems of the
body and may help reduce the boredom and monotony associated
with daily training. This type of training is likely to enhance V̇O2max,
increase the LT, and improve exercise economy and fuel use.
The 
various 
types 
of 
training 
induce 
different
physiological responses. Ideally, a sound program would
incorporate all types of training into the athlete’s
weekly, monthly, or yearly training schedule.
1542

Application of Program Design to
Training Seasons
The program design variables and the various types of aerobic
endurance training are applied to athletes’ sport seasons to create a
yearly or season-long training program. Typically, the training year is
divided into phases that include the off-season (sometimes called
base training), preseason, in-season (sport competition), and
postseason (active rest). Table 21.5 summarizes the main objectives
and the typical program design assignments for each training
season.
TABLE 21.5 Sport Season Objectives and Program
Design Assignments
Sport season
Objective
Frequency
per week
Duration
or volume
Intensity
BEGINNER ATHLETE
Off-season
(base training)
Develop sound conditioning
base
3-4
Moderate to
long
Low to
moderate
Preseason
Improve factors important to
aerobic endurance
performance
3-5
Moderate to
long
Low to high
In-season
(competition)
Maintain factors important to
aerobic endurance
performancea
3-5 (training
and racing)
Short
(training)
High
(training)
Moderate
Low or high
Race
Moderate to
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensive endurance, pace/tempo, and high-
intensity intervals of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endurance, LT, and exercise economy between races.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensive endurance, pace/tempo, and high-
intensity intervals of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endurance, LT, and exercise economy between races.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1543

Sport season
Objective
Frequency
per week
Duration
or volume
Intensity
distance
high (racing)
Postseason
(active rest)
Recovery from competitive
season
2-3
Short
Low
ADVANCED ATHLETE
Off-season
(base training)
Develop sound conditioning
base
5-6
Long
Low to
moderate
Preseason
Improve factors important to
aerobic endurance
performance
6-7
Moderate to
long
Moderate to
high
In-season
(competition)
Maintain factors important to
aerobic endurance
performance and increase
goal race pace enduranceb
5-6 (training
and racing)
Short
(training)
Low
(training)
Moderate
Low or high
Race
distance
High (racing)
Postseason
(active rest)
Recovery from competitive
season
3-5
Short
Low
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensive endurance, pace/tempo, and high-
intensity intervals of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endurance, LT, and exercise economy between races.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensive endurance, pace/tempo, and high-
intensity intervals of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endurance, LT, and exercise economy between races.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
Off-Season (Base Training)
The priority in off-season training is to develop a large base of
cardiorespiratory fitness. Initially, the training program should
progress to be composed of long-duration and low-intensity
workouts. In the mid- to late off-season, intensity and, to a lesser
extent, duration are increased; however, it is typically recommended
that intermediate and advanced athletes should not increase their
training duration or volume more than 5% to 10% per week.
1544

However, for beginner athletes who start with a very low training
volume, it may be safe and logical to increase by more than 10%.
For example, an athlete who is new to running may run 1 mile (1.6
km) three times in their first week. By following the 10%
recommendation, the following week would realize an increase of
only a total of 0.3 miles (0.5 km), whereas the athlete should
logically be able to absorb more than this—in this case, an additional
0.5 miles (0.8 km) on two separate days (i.e., a total of 1 mile [1.6
km] or 33% increase). Similarly, cyclists, by the nature of the
volume of training they engage in as well as the low-impact nature
of their sport, may be able to safely increase their volume by more
than 10%. For example, a beginner cyclist may complete an average
of 25 miles (40 km) in a week. The recommendation would mean
the following week they would increase their volume by a total of
1.25 to 2.5 miles (2-4 km). If this athlete is training at an average
speed of 10 miles per hour (16 km/h), this volume would equate to
an additional 7.5 to 15 minutes, which in both absolute and relative
terms is small. However, it is also important to consider that training
is progressed across many weeks in a training program, and even
small changes on a week-to-week basis will eventually add up to
substantial increases in volume or intensity. Therefore, while an
initial increase in volume of >10% may be advisable in some,
continued increases across a training program of more than 5% to
10% per week may create a substantial training stress that exceeds
an athlete’s maximal tolerable dosage, particularly as the stress from
training accumulates across the training program. Aside from
background and training status, individual differences in response to
training volume stimuli should also be taken into account. To avoid
injury and optimize training adaptations, some athletes will require
more recovery time, including a slower increase in training volume,
than their peers. Monitoring subjective levels of fatigue and
soreness, and objective measures such as resting heart rate and
heart rate variability, can help guide appropriate increases in training
volume. It should also be noted that increasing training duration too
1545

much too quickly can actually lead to decreases in aerobic
endurance performance (75).
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
Marathon Runner During the Off-Season
(Base Training) Phase
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Rest
day
45 min
Fartlek run
30 min
aerobic run
Rest day
45 min
aerobic run
Rest
day
60 min
aerobic run
Comments
Frequency. To help combat overtraining or overuse, the aerobic training days should
be spread out evenly during the week to allow recovery between sessions.
Duration. Since the athlete’s race distance is a marathon, the duration or running
distance of the extensive endurance training sessions should progressively approach
80% to 85% that of the marathon, at least for one of the two aerobic (extensive
endurance) sessions.
Intensity. To complete the extensive endurance sessions, the athlete should run at a
low intensity or a slow training pace; high respiratory stress should be avoided. The
aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale (figure 21.1 on
page 701) or zone 2 on the five-zone intensity scale (table 21.1 on page 697).
Sample Swim Training Program for an
Intermediate 140.6 Triathlete During
the Off-Season (Base Phase)
1546

Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Rest
day
45 min
aerobic
swim
2 min intervals
@ 80%
V̇O2max/2 min
passive
recovery × 8
reps
45 min
aerobic swim
Rest day
(no swim
workout)
1 mile
(1.6 km)
Fartlek
swim
45 min
aerobic
swim
This program has a swim focus; the race swim distance is 2.4 miles (3.9 km).
Comments
Frequency. Because the interval and Fartlek workouts are stressful, these training
sessions should be spread out during the week to allow recovery between sessions.
Duration. The intervals are work bouts of 2 minutes with ≤2-minute passive recovery
between repetitions.
Repetitions. The intervals are 6 to 10 reps × 2 minutes.
Intensity. The athlete should swim at an intensity (pace) at or above 80% V̇O2max
when completing the work portions of the interval session. The aerobic swims should
be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on
the five-zone intensity scale (table 21.1 on page 697).
Preseason
During the preseason, the athlete should focus on progressively
increasing training intensity, maintaining or reducing duration, and
incorporating all types of aerobic training stimuli into the program.
The strengths and weaknesses of the individual athlete should
determine the amount and frequency of each type of training.
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
50 Kilometer (31 Mile) Cyclist During
the Preseason Phase
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Rest
day
60 min
aerobic
30 min
pace/tempo
Rest day
45 min
Fartlek ride
Rest
day
75 min
aerobic ride
1547

Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
ride
ride
Comments
Frequency. Because the pace/tempo and Fartlek rides are stressful, these two training
days should be spread out during the week to allow recovery between sessions.
Duration. For steady pace/tempo training, exercise duration is shorter than race
distance or duration to allow for a higher training intensity.
Intensity. The athlete should cycle at a high intensity or a fast training pace for both
pace/tempo and Fartlek sessions; high respiratory stress is required to simulate race
pace. The aerobic rides should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale (figure
21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on the five-zone intensity scale (table 21.1 on page 697).
Sample Training Program for an
Intermediate 10 Kilometer (6.2 Mile)
Runner During the Late Preseason Phase
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Rest
day
10 reps of
0.5 km (0.3
mi) intervals
at race pace
with a 1:1
W:R ratio
10 km
(6.2 mi)
easy run
45 min
aerobic run
HIIT 3 min @
90%
V̇O2max/2
min passive
recovery × 6
reps
45 min
aerobic
run
45 min
Fartlek run
on flat
course
Comments
Frequency. Because the interval runs are stressful, these training sessions should be
spread out during the week to allow recovery between sessions.
Duration. The total distance or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interval work bouts) should approach the competition distances as the
athlete becomes more highly trained.
Intensity. The athlete should run at an intensity (pace) close to or above LT when
completing the work bout portions of the interval training sessions. The aerobic runs
should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or
zone 2 on the five-zone intensity scale (table 21.1 on page 697).
1548

In-Season (Competition)
The in-season training program needs to be designed to include
competition or race days in the training schedule. Low-intensity and
short-duration training days should precede scheduled competitions
so that the athlete is fully recovered and rested. The types of
training employed during the in-season are based on the continued
goal of improving weaknesses and maintaining strengths of the
athlete.
Sample Training Program for a 5
Kilometer (3.1 Mile) Collegiate Cross-
Country Runner During the In-Season
Phase
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Rest or
easy run
60 min
aerobic
run
45-min
Fartlek run
of hard/easy
work on hills
and flats
20 min
pace/tempo
run
30 min
aerobic run
with race
pace pickups
20 min
aerobic
run with
race pace
pickups
Competition
Comments
Frequency. Because Fartlek and tempo runs are stressful, no more than two in total
should occur during the week.
Duration. The total distance or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interval work bouts) should approach the competition distance as the
athlete becomes more highly trained.
Intensity. The athlete should run at an intensity (pace) close to V̇O2max when
completing the work bout portions of the Fartlek training sessions and LT for the
tempo run. The aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale
(figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on the five-zone intensity scale (table 21.1 on
page 697).
1549

Postseason (Active Rest)
During the postseason, the main focus should be on recovering
from the previous competitive season. Low training duration and
intensity are typical for this active rest phase, but enough overall
exercise or activity should be performed to maintain a sufficient level
of cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, and lean body mass.
During the postseason, the aerobic endurance athlete should focus
on rehabilitating injuries incurred during the competitive season and
improving the strength of weak or underconditioned muscle groups.
A sound year-round aerobic endurance training program
should be divided into sport seasons with specific goals
and objectives designed to improve performance
gradually and progressively.
1550

Special Issues Related to Aerobic
Endurance Training
In addition to the program design variables, it is important to
consider other related issues when developing an aerobic endurance
training program. These include cross-training, detraining, tapering,
and supplemental resistance training. The strength and conditioning
professional should contemplate these issues when adapting the
types of aerobic endurance training programs to an individual athlete
or developing an aerobic endurance program based on the sport
season.
Cross-Training
Cross-training is a mode of training that can be used to maintain
general conditioning in athletes during periods of reduced training
due to injury or during recovery from a training cycle (96). Cross-
training may reduce the likelihood of overuse injuries because it
distributes the physical stress of training to muscle groups different
from those used during training (122). Multiple-event athletes also
use cross-training to maximize performance in swimming, cycling,
and running. The benefits derived from cross-training include
adaptations of the respiratory, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal
systems (88, 122). It seems reasonable to expect that cross-training
would maintain some level of conditioning in single-event athletes
who perform another mode of training (e.g., runners who perform
cycling or swimming). To be effective in maintaining V̇O2max, cross-
training must be equal in intensity and duration to the athlete’s
primary mode of exercise; however, cross-training will not improve
single-event performance to the same magnitude as mode-specific
training only (96).
Detraining
Detraining occurs when the athlete reduces the training duration or
intensity or stops training altogether due to a break in the training
1551

program, injury, or illness. In the absence of an appropriate training
stimulus, the athlete experiences a loss of the physiological
adaptations brought about by training. It has been demonstrated
that most of the physiological adaptations attained with training
regress rapidly toward pretraining levels when the training stimulus
is removed (5, 102). To avoid some of the effects of detraining, the
use of other training modes may be beneficial; however, cross-
training may only attenuate some of the loss of physiological
adaptation normally seen during complete cessation of training.
Aerobic endurance athletes can minimize the effects of detraining by
continuing to use their primary mode of exercise at reduced
frequency and intensity, if possible (136).
Tapering
Tapering is an important component of the training program as
aerobic endurance athletes prepare for major competition. Tapering
involves the systematic reduction of training duration and intensity,
combined with an increased emphasis on technique work and
nutritional intervention. The objective of tapering the training
regimen is to attain peak performance at the time of competition.
While the duration of the taper depends on numerous factors, a
typical tapering period may last between 7 and 28 days (91).
Although most of the available research on tapering has been
conducted on swimmers (95, 126, 131), the use of tapering is not
limited to these aerobic endurance athletes. Research among
runners and cyclists has shown that these aerobic endurance
athletes also benefit from a well-planned tapering regimen (18, 91).
Tapering before competition helps facilitate recovery and rehydration
and promotes increases in muscle and liver glycogen stores (91).
Several types of tapering models may be employed by athletes in
order to restore impaired physiological capacities resulting from the
rigors of training. The most common tapering models are linear,
step, and progressive tapers (131). The linear taper is characterized
by a gradual decrease in the overall daily training volume throughout
1552

the duration of the taper. In contrast, a step taper is typified by an
abrupt and considerable reduction (normally ≥50%) in training
volume that is maintained throughout the duration of the taper
without fluctuation. The progressive taper uses a combination of the
linear and step tapering models. This model is associated with a
rapid 10% to 15% immediate reduction in training volume, with
smaller, more gradual reductions in volume at each tier. Training
volume is systematically reduced while intensity and frequency are
maintained.
Concurrent Aerobic Endurance Training
and Resistance Training
Resistance training is an important but often overlooked factor in
improving performance in aerobic endurance athletes. This may be
due to misconceptions that resistance training may increase an
athlete’s 
nonfunctional 
muscle 
mass 
and 
thereby 
decrease
performance, or the potential interference phenomenon that may
occur when resistance and aerobic endurance training sessions are
completed within a training program (i.e., concurrent training)
(35). However, apart from the well-known benefits that resistance
training can provide athletes, such as reducing muscle imbalances,
assistance with preventing overuse injuries, and recovery from
injuries (122), numerous research investigations (25, 32, 45, 82, 84,
109, 114, 119, 127, 135), meta-analyses, and systematic review
articles (1, 4, 10, 11, 17, 31, 37, 38, 65, 80, 89, 116, 143) have
demonstrated that it can also improve performance (e.g., time trial,
middle- and long-distance) across a number of aerobic endurance
disciplines including running, cycling, cross-country skiing, and
swimming, and performance-related variables such as strength,
power, running economy, and maximal sprint speed. For example, a
systematic review found that resistance training not only improved
running performance from distances of 1,500 meters (0.9 mile) to
10,000 meters (6.2 miles) but also improved muscular strength and
power factors as well as running economy (1). More specifically,
1553

both heavy resistance training and explosive or plyometric training
have been found to be effective training methods to concurrently
train with aerobic endurance training to improve running economy
(10, 31). Improvements in running economy and performance
following heavy resistance training and plyometric training are
primarily related to an increase in strength of the muscles used
during running thereby reducing the relative intensity of the load of
the exercising muscles (43). Plyometric training, which uses the
stretch-shortening cycle, not only improves the storage and elastic
energy properties of the exercising muscles but assists them to work
more efficiently (86). It is important to note that maximal strength
training has been found to produce greater benefits than
submaximal strength training or maximal power training, with
submaximal strength training producing the least gains of all other
methods (10).
It is also worth highlighting that no signs of overtraining (1) or
significant increases in body mass (1, 17), maximal oxygen uptake
(17), or blood lactate markers (17) have been associated with the
aerobic performance improvements for the majority of concurrent
training studies. However, not all concurrent training studies (143)
have resulted in improvements in aerobic endurance performance
measures. The differences between studies is often due to the
choice of resistance training exercises (e.g., high vs. low intensity,
explosive or plyometric) (80), characteristics of the participants, and
methods used to measure performance improvements (17). It is also
worth noting that studies that reported no improvement in running
economy often used a lower frequency of resistance training
sessions (17) and shorter duration concurrent training programs (31,
38).
Exercise Selection
Most studies found that athletes who have benefited from
concurrent training used free weight, multijoint exercises (17). This
benefit may be related to the higher level of muscle coordination and
1554

hence neuromuscular stimulus experienced with free weights
compared to machine-based or single-joint exercises (17). For those
studies involving running, the benefit may also be related to the
greater transference from the resistance training environment to the
running movement due to the biomechanical similarity between the
two (17). High-velocity movements including plyometric exercises
such as hops, bounds, jumps, drop jumps, and squat jumps have
shown to have a positive impact on aerobic endurance performance
measures (31, 38). For more information, refer to chapters 18 and
19 for program design and technique details.
Training Intensity and Frequency
A common finding of concurrent training research for improving
aerobic endurance performance is the use of heavy resistance
training or plyometric training by athletes two or three times per
week (10, 17) or a combination of both (4, 31, 38). However, to
reduce the impact of a resistance training session on a subsequent
aerobic endurance training session (i.e., residual fatigue, muscle
soreness, and physiological disturbance), the volume should be
reduced to limit the potential carryover of fatigue caused by the
resistance training session (35). That is, keep the loads high (e.g.,
≥90% of 1RM or ≤4RM) (38) but the weekly volume low (31). It is
also worth noting that strength developed during a preparatory
phase has been found to be maintained for up to 12 weeks with just
one resistance training session per week thereafter (111), thus
allowing athletes to maintain strength gains throughout subsequent
training phases with minimal time commitment.
Recovery Time Between Concurrent Training Sessions
The level of recovery during a concurrent training program is
influenced not only by the intensity, frequency, and duration of the
individual training sessions but also the mode of aerobic endurance
training (e.g., running vs. cycling) and type of resistance training
performed (e.g., velocity of movement) (35). The shorter the
1555

recovery period between training sessions, the greater the level of
fatigue carried from one training session to the next (33, 110). In
conjunction, there is an increase in the physiological cost of the next
training session and a reduction in training performance, which may
result in lower adaptations (32). Some posttraining fatigue is
necessary 
for 
stimulating 
training 
adaptations, 
but 
it 
is
simultaneously necessary to maximize recovery between training
sessions, particularly if on the same day. To achieve this,
manipulation of concurrent training variables such as sequence of
training, training intensities, volumes, and frequency as well as the
recovery period between training sessions can be adjusted (11, 34,
110). However, because athletes respond differently to training
stimuli and recovery techniques, it is important to monitor athletes’
recovery via measures such as heart rate, task completion times,
RPE, blood lactate, power output, and the like (35).
Training Sequence
The order in which resistance and aerobic endurance training
sessions are completed may affect adaptations because the acute
physiological responses for resistance and aerobic endurance
training are distinct to each form of training (34) and may influence
the quality and quantity of training sessions completed on the same
day. Findings have been mixed on the effects of concurrent training
sequence on strength and V̇O2max (25, 32, 45, 46). As a general
guide, however, the training sequence should be varied throughout
the phases of the training year and reflect the highest priority (e.g.,
maximizing strength or improving aerobic endurance) for each
training cycle; the most important training goal should be trained
first within a given workout while the athlete is fresh (125).
Mode of Aerobic Endurance Training
The results of a concurrent training meta-analysis found no
significant differences across the sports studied (i.e., running,
cycling, cross-country skiing, and swimming), with all sports
1556

benefiting similarly in terms of performance from undertaking a
concurrent training program (10). However, the difference in muscle
action types (eccentric vs. concentric) may create a greater level of
muscle damage from some modes compared to others (e.g., running
vs. cycling) (143), particularly if large distances are involved.
Therefore, in concurrent training programs that involve running, a
greater recovery period may be needed when completed in the
hours before or following a resistance training session. This concept
may be especially important for athletes undertaking more than one
aerobic endurance discipline, such as triathletes (35).
Athlete Training Status
The training status of athletes has been suggested to be an
important variable to consider when undertaking concurrent training
(11). While the majority of findings indicate that concurrent training
can benefit aerobic endurance performance of athletes of different
levels across different aerobic endurance disciplines (10), the
responses may be different. For example, a systematic review and
meta-analysis found that following a concurrent training program,
trained or highly trained aerobic endurance athletes did not
demonstrate any impairments to improvements in V̇O2max; however,
untrained individuals did (65). Consequently, for aerobic endurance
athletes who have minimal resistance training experience or for
lesser trained aerobic endurance athletes, it may be necessary to
allow greater recovery times between training sessions, or apply a
slower progression of training variables (e.g., intensity, frequency, or
duration) or exercises compared to higher trained athletes.
Chapter 18 provides guidelines for designing resistance training
programs that can apply to aerobic endurance athletes; refer to
scenario C for a sample program that focuses on a high school cross
country runner.
1557

Altitude
Altitude is classified into several categories, ranging from sea level
(>500 m [1,640 ft]) to low (>500-2,000 m [1,640-6,562 ft]),
moderate (>2,000-3,000 m [6,562-9,843 ft]), high (>3,000-5,500 m
[6,562-18,045 ft]), and extreme (>5,500 m [>18,045 ft]) (39).
While the percentage of oxygen is the same at different altitudes
(94), the atmospheric pressure drops, causing a reduction in partial
pressure (PO2), which acts as the driving force for gas exchange in
the lungs (39, 94). This leads to a cascade of physiological
responses to compensate for the reduction in PO2. Subsequently,
aerobic endurance performance decrements upon acute altitude
exposure may begin to occur at altitudes as low as 700 meters
(2,297 ft) (145).
Acclimatization to altitude may occur between 12 and 14 days at
moderate altitudes up to 2,300 meters (7,546 ft); however, it has
been found that this process may take up to several months (145).
According to Wyatt (145), recommendations for optimizing
performance at altitude vary dramatically, from arriving immediately
before competition (24-48 hr) to 12 weeks of altitude exposure.
Many elite and sub-elite athletes train at altitude to produce an
ergogenic effect. In order to experience a benefit from this type of
training, it has been reported that an athlete must receive a hypoxic
dose of training ≥12 hours per day for a minimum of three weeks at
moderate altitude (approximately 2,100-2,500 m [6,890-8,202 ft])
(66, 145). Live high, train low (LHTL) is a method commonly
used by athletes seeking to benefit from altitude training. LHTL
requires individuals to live at moderate altitudes, between 2,000
meters and 3,000 meters (6,562-9,843 ft), and train at or near sea
level (66). This method of training allows athletes to simultaneously
experience the benefits of altitude acclimatization and training at sea
level (139). Thus, LHTL may potentially provide an ergogenic benefit
by allowing athletes to take advantage of the metabolic and
hematological adaptations experienced when living at altitude to
augment neuromuscular development at lower altitudes (39, 139).
1558

Heat Acclimation
It is well documented that aerobic endurance performances are
influenced by hot environments (55, 99, 100). Consequently,
undertaking training or competition in hot environments before an
athlete has acclimatized results in greater thermoregulatory and
cardiovascular strain, fatigue, increased perception of effort, and a
negative impact on performance (52) via elevated core and skin
temperatures, increased sweating, and loss of electrolytes. To avoid
these negative effects, athletes are advised to acclimatize prior to
competition in warm to hot conditions. Adaptations to heat
acclimation protocols include an increase in plasma volume and
thereby an increase in blood volume, an improvement in skin blood
flow sensitivity, earlier onset of sweating at a lower core body
temperature combined with an increase in sweat rate and
evaporative cooling, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (51,
101). These changes, along with many others, help provide
cardiovascular stability, lower core and skin temperatures, and a
reduced exercise heart rate. A more detailed description of the
adaptations to training in the heat can be found in chapter 6 (see
the section Heat Acclimatization).
Heat Acclimation Protocols
An athlete can adapt naturally to a hot environment by either living
and training in hot ambient conditions over a long period of time
(i.e., heat acclimatization) or training in an artificially hot indoor
environment (i.e., heat acclimation) (108). Heat acclimation
protocols are typically classified as short (<7 days), medium (8-14
days), or long term (>15 days) (50). Even though the majority
(~75%) of heat adaptations occur within the first four to six days of
heat exposure (e.g., heart rate and core temperature adaptations)
(101), it may take seven or more days for the remainder of the
adaptations to take place (e.g., enhanced core body temperature,
cardiovascular, sudomotor, and sweat rate adaptations) (28, 81, 101,
108). It is recommended that athletes participating in long-duration
1559

or multiday events as well as those of a lesser training status
undertake longer protocols to ensure appropriate levels of heat
adaptation (107).
The frequency of heat exposure is important because adaptations
occur more rapidly with days of consecutive exposure; however, if
over a 10- to 14-day protocol, one to three days of heat exposure
are missed, it is unlikely that these missed days will significantly
affect heat acclimation adaptations (107). It is important to note
that twice-daily heat exposure is no more effective than once-daily
for physiological, perceptual, or performance adaptations (141). For
a heat acclimation protocol to be effective, an increase in core and
skin temperatures and sweat rate is required (101, 108). To achieve
this, it is generally recommended that athletes aim for 60 minutes of
heat exposure (108) and a maximum of 90 minutes, although 120
minutes has been shown to be effective (115, 144). It should be
noted that it may take time to build up to these exposure times over
the heat acclimation protocol period as determined by the intensity
of the training sessions as well as the athlete’s heat tolerance.
Measures of training intensity such as heart rate and performance
times may be misleading in the short term until the athlete heat
acclimatizes (54). A more appropriate alternative may be a scalar
method such as perceived exertion (54). However, markers that an
athlete is positively adapting are a lower heart rate and core
temperature for a given workload, increased sweat rate, and
enhanced aerobic exercise capacity (115).
Athletes with higher levels of aerobic fitness may acquire heat
adaptations more rapidly and retain them longer than those athletes
with a lower level of aerobic fitness (101). More aerobically fit
athletes can also tolerate higher core body temperatures and
therefore can perform better in the heat (101, 121). Due to the
variability in responses, it is important that all athletes are monitored
throughout an acclimation protocol, especially those who are just
starting. Similarly, due to the added risk that hot environments can
pose for athletes during training, several safety precautions should
1560

be implemented when working with heat acclimation protocols. For
example, always begin well hydrated, maintain hydration, ensure
cooling equipment is available (e.g., cold-water immersion bath or
ice vests), and signs and symptoms of exertional heat illness should
be well known to athletes and staff and be posted. For more
information, readers are directed to Pryor and colleagues (107).
To determine individual athlete adaptation and decay rates, heat
acclimatization protocols should be practiced months before
competition in the heat (9), and athletes should also undertake a
practice heat event in similar conditions to those they expect to
perform in on competition day (9). It is recommended that the
environment have a wet-bulb globe temperature >30 °C (>86 °F) to
provide the necessary stress to elicit heat adaptations in core body
temperature as well as induce a higher sweat response (28).
A reduction in training duration or intensity followed by a
progressive increase over the protocol period may be required
compared to the usual training load, on the initial introduction of a
heat acclimation protocol (107). In addition, it may be necessary to
use a combination of exercise and passive heat exposure (e.g.,
sauna or hot-water immersion) sessions as the athlete commences
and progresses through the heat acclimation process to enable
integration with the athlete’s training schedule (54). For both hot
sauna (118) and hot-water immersion (147, 148) postexercise
sessions have been found to provide heat acclimation and
performance benefits. However, to be successful, it is recommended
that the heat stimulus be applied for a duration of 30 minutes per
session, ideally on consecutive days, when possible to maximize heat
acclimation adaptations (61). This process enables athletes to
maintain or elevate their core body temperature and increase their
sweat rate. An additional benefit of passive heat exposure is that it
can reduce the volume of heat exercise training (107), which may be
particularly useful when introducing unacclimatized athletes to heat
acclimation protocols.
1561

Conclusion
Training to improve aerobic endurance performance requires a well-
developed and scientifically based program. The training program
should be developed in conjunction with periodic performance
assessment and should be structured to enhance the strengths and
improve the weaknesses of the athlete. A combination of a variety of
the training types described in this chapter should be used so that all
physiological systems involved in successful performance are
overloaded and challenged to respond with positive adaptations.
Training programs should be developed far enough in advance
and with enough structure to ensure enhancement of performance
but with enough flexibility to avoid overuse injuries and overtraining.
Although other forms of training can be employed to avoid boredom
and overtraining, activity-specific training results in the best
adaptations to training and ultimately the most improvement in
performance.
AEROBIC ENDURANCE TRAINING
EXERCISES
The following section discusses some basic technique considerations
for performance of aerobic endurance training. General guidelines
for both common aerobic training machines and nonmachine
activities are provided. These exercise instructions are largely
adapted from Beck (8).
  1  Treadmill  713
  2  Stationary Bike  714
  3  Rowing Machine  715
  4  Stair Stepper  716
  5  Elliptical Trainer  717
1562

  6  Walking (Gait)  718
  7  Running (Gait)  718
  8  Freestyle Swimming  719
Aerobic Endurance Training
Exercises
  1   TREADMILL
Starting Position
Begin by attaching the security clip to the clothing where it will
not interfere with the action of the lower or upper limbs.
Straddle the belt by placing the feet on the right and left
platform.
Read the instructions on the console of the treadmill to gain an
understanding of how to adjust the speed and incline of the
specific treadmill being used.
Turn on the machine and adjust the speed of the belt so it is at
the desired warm-up speed.
Movement Phase
While holding the handrails, allow one leg to swing freely, and
using a pawing action, strike the treadmill with the mid-foot.
Once comfortable with the speed of the belt, begin walking or
running on the treadmill.
Run or walk, keeping toward the front portion of the machine
while remaining in the center of the treadmill deck.
Release the hands from the handrails and adjust the speed and
incline until the desired training level is attained.
Avoid holding on to the console or front handrails or leaning
backward while walking or running.
Keep the head up and eyes focused forward to avoid looking
down at the console for extended periods of time.
1563

Ending Position
Reduce the speed of the treadmill and perform a 3- to 5-minute
cooldown to prevent blood pooling in the lower extremities and
improve venous return to the heart.
Step onto the platforms on either side of the belt and turn the
machine off.
COMMON ERRORS
Continually holding the handrails—holding the handrails
beyond the initial entry phase interrupts posture and
stride mechanics and limits core activation; after the
initial entry phase use a natural walking or running
stride pattern with an upright posture and free moving
arm swing, as if walking or running outside
Looking continuously down at the console, which affects
stride mechanics and posture and can cause neck
discomfort; keep the eyes focused forward, with short
glances to the console as needed to monitor display
information
  2   STATIONARY BIKE
Starting Position
Begin by adjusting the seat height so the knee of the extended
leg is slightly flexed (25-30 degrees) at the bottom of the pedal
stroke.
The foot of the down leg should be flat and parallel to the floor
with the balls of the feet in contact with the pedals.
Adjust the seat so the knee is over the center of the pedal on
the extended leg and the hips do not rock back and forth during
pedaling.
While maintaining a neutral spine position, lean slightly forward
at the hips.
1564

Adjust the handlebars so that when the arms are extended at a
downward angle the elbows are slightly flexed. Ideally, the
lower arm and torso will form an angle of approximately 90
degrees.
Movement Phase
Begin pedaling while keeping the balls of the feet in contact
with the pedals throughout the duration of the exercise.
Maintain a neutral spine posture and do not round the
shoulders.
With bullhorn handlebars, a variety of hand positions may be
used. These include
pronated, palms-facing-downward grip, allowing a more
upright posture;
neutral palms-facing grip on the sides of the handlebars,
encouraging a greater forward lean; and
racing position, with the forearms resting on the handlebars,
creating maximum forward lean.
Ending Position
Slow down until the pedals have come to a complete stop, and
then step off the bike.
COMMON ERRORS
If pedaling using the toes only and not the balls of the
feet or moving laterally in the seat, the seat is too high.
If the knees come above the height of the hips at the top
of the pedaling stroke, the seat is too low.
If struggling to reach the handlebars, the seat may be
too far back or the handlebars too low. Correct seat and
handlebar height ensures maintenance of power output
throughout the pedaling stroke.
1565

Proper seat height adjustment: (a) leg straight with knee locked and heel on
pedal; (b) knee slightly flexed with ball of foot on pedal; (c) with the pedal at 12
o’clock, the knee is about even with the hips and approximately parallel with the
floor
  3   ROWING MACHINE
Starting Position (Start)
Keep the back upright, not rounded, with a slight forward lean
from the hips.
Hold the head upright while looking straight ahead.
Extend the arms in front of the body and grab the rower handle
while flexing the hips and knees until the shins are
approximately vertical.
Movement Phase (Drive)
Extend the knees first followed by the hips before using the
arms to pull the handle toward the abdomen just below the rib
cage. As the knees near their end range of motion, tilt the
upper body backward by extending the hips before pulling with
the arms to complete the movement.
Adjust the air vent to increase (more air admitted) or decrease
(less air admitted) the resistance provided.
1566

Ending Position (Finish)
The knees should be fully extended with the torso leaning
slightly backward.
Arms are flexed at the elbows and the handle is at the abdomen
just below the rib cage.
Recovery is the movement from the finish position back to the start
in the reverse order of drive phase events—that is, extension of the
arms first before flexion at the hips (to move the upper body
forward), then flexion of the knees back to the start position.
COMMON ERRORS
Using arms and legs at the same time or pulling only
with arms—the legs provide the majority of the power in
the drive phase; the drive phase sequence is knees, hips,
then arms.
The handle going up and over the knees on the way back
or the chain hitting the machine in a whipping motion,
which is often due to the recovery sequence being out of
sync; the recovery sequence is the opposite of the drive
phase, so arms, hips then knees
1567

  4   STAIR STEPPER
Starting Position
Hold the handrails while stepping forward onto the pedals.
Place the whole foot in contact with each pedal.
Movement Phase
Begin stepping, using the handrails for support.
While maintaining an upright posture and with the legs
providing the force, take deep (4- to 8-in. [10-20 cm]) steps.
Keep the hips level and centered on the machine to avoid
swaying from side to side or step to step.
Do not allow the steps to contact the floor or the upper-limit
stop of the machine. The heel typically comes off the pedal as
1568

the foot is raised but should make contact again with the pedal
when pressing down.
Continue to hold the handrails lightly while looking straight
ahead, keeping an upright posture with the shoulders squared
and relaxed, the torso over the hips, the knees aligned with the
feet, and toes pointed forward.
Ending Position
Hold the handrails while stepping backward off the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping an upright posture, or leaning on the
machine, which often is an indication that the level
selected is too high
Taking small steps and staying only on the toes with a
high step frequency, which means the steps are too
shallow
1569

  5   ELLIPTICAL TRAINER
Starting Position
Facing the center console of the elliptical, place one foot on
each pedal.
While standing upright and looking forward, grasp the handrails
with the torso upright and evenly balanced directly over the
hips, head held high, and shoulders relaxed (but not rounded).
Movement Phase
Begin pedaling forward, moving the arms and legs in a
reciprocating fashion.
The feet should remain in full contact with the pedals
throughout the duration of the exercise unless the design of the
1570

machine causes the rear heel to lift.
The knees should not be allowed to come forward past the toes
when in the flexed position.
Hold onto the handrails in order to maintain balance. If handrail
holding is unnecessary, it is a good idea to release the hold on
the handrails and pump the arms similarly to the way they
move in walking or running.
The incline of the elliptical may be increased to more closely
simulate a running motion or reduced to replicate a walking
motion.
Performing this exercise with a forward motion may place
greater emphasis on the quadriceps; performing it with a
backward motion may increase the stress on the hamstrings
and gluteals.
Ending Position
Slow down until the machine has come to a complete stop, then
step off the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Lifting the heels and applying too much pressure via the
forefoot; use the whole pedal to distribute pressure
when applying force to the pedals
Leaning on the handrails, which disengages the core
muscles and affects movement phase execution; if
necessary to hold on for balance, ensure an upright
posture is always maintained and the core is engaged,
and avoid placing hands too low on the handrails, which
can cause a forward lean
1571

  6   WALKING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright with the eyes looking straight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, and do not allow them to round.
Position the upper body directly over the hips while keeping the
ear, shoulder, and hip aligned.
Foot Strike
The heel should strike the ground first, followed by a gentle
rolling heel-to-ball action, allowing the weight to be spread over
the foot.
The weight should transfer from the outer side of the heel and
continue to shift forward and slightly inward toward the middle
of the ball of the foot at push-off.
Stride
1572

Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to increase stride length.
Lift the knees and engage the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backward in a reciprocating
fashion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice versa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
At faster walking speeds, the actions should be as follows:
The arms should be flexed at the elbows and maintained at
90 degrees with arm movement originating at the shoulders.
The arms and hands should swing backward and forward,
not crossing the midline of the body, in order to create
forward propulsion.
The hands should stay relaxed, with the hand coming up to
the level of the chest at the nipple line on the forward swing
and the hip bone at the side of the body on the backward
swing.
Note: Racewalkers must increase hip rotation with each stride to
create a pelvic roll. This enables them to increase stride length while
keeping one foot in contact with the ground at all times per the rules
of the sport.
  7   RUNNING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright with the eyes looking straight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, but do not allow them to round.
Position the upper body during running with an approximately
2- to 4-degree lean from the heels to the athlete’s head while
keeping the ear, shoulder, and hip aligned.
1573

Foot Strike
The foot should strike the ground slightly in front of or directly
below the athlete’s center of gravity (i.e., hips), which may be a
heel, mid-, or forefoot strike, followed by a gentle rolling heel-
to-ball action, allowing the weight to be spread over the foot
during the foot contact phase.
The weight will likely transfer from the outer side of the heel
and continue to shift.
Stride
Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to increase stride length.
Lift the knees and engage the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
With each running step, the foot should land approximately
under the hips to avoid braking and minimize contact time with
the ground.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backward in a reciprocating
motion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice versa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
The arms and hands should swing backward and forward from
the shoulder, not crossing the midline of the body, in order to
create forward propulsion.
Arm action of ±20-degree oscillation of the hands is acceptable
and may improve running economy (91a).
  8   FREESTYLE SWIMMING
Swimming performance is a combination of swimming-specific
fitness and technique. Less-than-optimal swimming technique can
significantly and negatively affect an athlete’s performance due to
1574

inefficient stroke execution, increase in drag, or a loss of power
production in the water. While a number of resources are available to
assist athletes and strength and conditioning professionals to
address these common errors, the best method to improve
swimming performance is to seek expert advice from a qualified
swim coach, who can not only assess fitness and performance
parameters but also advise from a technical perspective how these
areas can be improved.
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging hand entry, in which the hand crosses over the
center line on entry into the water
Early hand entry, which results in a short stroke
Poor catch and pull through—keeping the arm straight
when pulling through the water or finishing the stroke
early (i.e., not pulling through the full stroke)
Ineffective breathing technique such as holding the
breath until the head is out of the water or lifting the
head forward to breathe
Incorrect body position such as the hips dropping and
therefore increasing drag due to keeping the head up to
look forward
KEY TERMS
aerobic–anaerobic interval training
age-predicted maximal heart rate (APMHR)
altitude
base training
concurrent training
cross-training
cruise intervals
detraining
duration
1575

exercise economy
extensive endurance training
Fartlek training
frequency
functional capacity
heart rate reserve (HRR)
high-intensity interval training (HIIT)
in-season
intensity
interval training
Karvonen method
lactate threshold
live high, train low (LHTL)
long, slow distance training (LSD)
maximal aerobic capacity (V̇O2max)
maximal lactate steady state (MLSS)
maximum tolerated dose (MTD)
metabolic equivalent (MET)
minimum effective dose (MED)
mode
off-season
pace/tempo training
percentage of maximal heart rate (MHR) method
postseason
preseason
ratings of perceived exertion (RPE)
recovery
Tabata training
tapering
tempo intervals
threshold training
training specificity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1576

  1.  Which of the following is not an adaptation following exposure
to a heat acclimation protocol?
  a.  increase in cutaneous blood flow
  b.  increase in plasma volume
  c.  onset of sweating at a lower core temperature
  d.  less dilute sweat
  2.  All the following statements concerning heat acclimation for
aerobic endurance training are correct, except for which one?
  a.  Most heat adaptations are reported to occur within the
first four to six days of heat exposure.
  b.  Athletes with a lower level of aerobic fitness can acquire
heat adaptations more rapidly as well as retain them
longer than those athletes with a higher level of aerobic
fitness.
  c.  Heat acclimatization protocols should be practiced months
before competition in the heat.
  d.  Heat exposure training frequency is important because
adaptations occur more rapidly with days of consecutive
exposure.
  3.  Which of the following statements is not true concerning
concurrent training?
  a.  Most studies found that athletes who have benefited from
concurrent training have used machine- and single-joint-
oriented exercises only.
  b.  Heavy resistance training and explosive or plyometric
training by athletes two to three times per week have
been found to improve aerobic endurance performance.
  c.  The level of recovery following concurrent training
sessions may be influenced not only by the intensity,
frequency, and duration of the individual training sessions
but by the mode of aerobic endurance training and type of
resistance training performed.
  d.  The training sequence should be varied throughout the
phases of the training year to reflect what is most
1577

important during that phase of training.
  4.  Enhanced cardiovascular and thermoregulatory function,
improved mitochondrial energy production and oxidative
capacity of skeletal muscle, and increased use of fat as a fuel
are all physiological benefits of what type of aerobic
endurance training?
  a.  intensive pace training
  b.  interval training
  c.  tempo training
  d.  extensive endurance training
  5.  HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endurance athletes via several improvements including which
of the following?
  a.  improvements in peak power output
  b.  lowering of the ventilatory threshold
  c.  decreased use of fat as a fuel source
  d.  reduced hydrogen ion buffering
1578
