CHAPTER 22
PERIODIZATION
G. Gregory Haff, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Dan Wathen, Thomas R. Baechle,
and Roger W. Earle to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the central concepts that underpin the periodization of training;
appreciate the value, role, and application of periodization in strength and
conditioning programs;
describe the four periods of the traditional periodization model;
describe the two phases of the preparatory period of the traditional
periodization model;
relate the four sport seasons to the four periods of the traditional
periodization model; and
apply the program design variables to create a periodized strength training
program.
The ability to guide the training process and implement programming strategies
that enhance the athlete’s potential for achieving the highest level of performance
at targeted time points is largely affected by the long- and short-term
programming strategies implemented by the strength and conditioning
professional (69). The process of organizing these programming strategies is
generally referred to as periodization. The basic concepts associated with
periodization can be traced to ancient philosophers and physicians, such as Galen
(also known as Clausius Aelius Galenus), who presented the first description of
the application of periodized strength training methods, and Lucius Flavius
Philostratus, who presented a structured pre-Olympic training model (28, 50). In
the modern Olympic era periodization is often attributed to Leonid Matveyev (64),
who in the 1960s proposed the basic theories that underpin periodization. Even
though Matveyev is often considered the father of periodization, it is important to
1579

note that several other individuals were also exploring these concepts at the same
time, including László Nádori (71), Tudor Bompa (3), and Yuri Verkhoshansky
(102). Later on, American sport scientists Michael H. Stone, Harold O’Bryant, and
John Garhammer adapted the concepts of the early periodization theorists with
special application to strength and power athletes (89, 91).
While the concepts that underpin our understanding of periodization are well
established and are well accepted, confusion still exists in both the scientific (1, 2,
54, 79) and practical (25) literature about what periodization is and how it is used
to guide the training process. At the center of this confusion is the fact that the
terms periodization and programming are often used interchangeably within the
literature (20, 35, 37, 88). While periodization and programming are interrelated,
they represent different management levels of the training process (35, 38).
Specifically, periodization serves as the macro-management level of the training
process, while programming allows for the micro-management of the process
(38). Conceptually, periodization serves as a method for organizing deliberate
practice by providing the scaffold from which programming decisions are made
(60). The objectives targeted by the periodized plan are then aligned with training
cycles (e.g., micro-, meso-, and macrocycles, and annual and multiyear cycles)
(73) and individualized programs are constructed. Programming aligns the
activities undertaken (i.e., modes and methods of training) as part of the training
process with the athlete’s established training goals and the direction of the
training process (41). At the programming level, an integrated monitoring
program is used to fine-tune the training activities by providing information that
can further inform decisions about the training strategies implemented as part of
the athlete’s training program (figure 22.1) (22). In this regard, programming
becomes an operation in strategic thinking, with programmatic decisions being
considered in the context of the athlete’s holistic training program (e.g., physical
training, technical and tactical training, mental skills training, recovery methods,
and nutritional strategies) and the current state (37, 77). Ultimately, when all of
this is taken into account periodization simply serves as an organizational tool for
guiding the direction and structure of the training process.
1580

FIGURE 22.1 The symbiotic relationship between periodization, monitoring, and programming.
Reprinted with permission from G.G. Haff, “Periodization and Programming for Individual Sports,” in NSCA’s Essentials of Sport Science,
edited by D. French and L. Torres Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 29. Based on A.J. Cunanan, B.H. DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General
Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018): 787-797.
This chapter discusses the concept of periodization and its application within a
strength and conditioning program. To understand periodization theories and how
they are applied to training program design, it is essential to develop an
understanding of how the body responds to training (i.e., stressors) (34, 37); this
topic is discussed first. Second, the basic models that are used to plan the
training process are discussed. Third, the basic hierarchal structure of a
periodized training program is discussed to demonstrate how the training year is
broken into smaller blocks of training, each with its own training goals and
priorities. It is important to note that this overall schedule of training
encompasses all aspects of the athletes’ training program, including general
conditioning, sport-specific activities, and resistance training. Finally, the second
half of this chapter presents detailed examples of a yearlong periodized strength
and conditioning program. To understand the intricacies of programing, the
reader is encouraged to read chapter 18 first.
1581

Central Concepts Related to Periodization
A successful training program allows for management of the adaptive and
recovery responses to specific interventions that are delivered in a structured
way (41). The ultimate success of any training program centers on its ability to
induce specific physiological adaptations and translate those adaptations into
increases in performance. At the center of this process is the ability to manage
the adaptive response, handle accumulated fatigue, and capitalize on the
aftereffects established from the various training factors encountered. The
strength of a periodized training plan lies in its ability to sequence and structure
the training interventions in order to manage all of these factors and peak
performance at appropriate time points (35, 37, 38, 41). Ultimately, peak
performance can be optimized only for short periods of time (7-14 days), and the
average time it can be maintained is inversely related to the average intensity of
the training plan (35, 36). In order to elucidate how periodized training models
can manage these factors, three basic mechanistic theories have been
established: the general adaptation syndrome (GAS), stimulus–fatigue–
recovery–adaptation theory, and the fitness–fatigue paradigm (35, 38,
41).
Periodization is the logical and systematic process of sequencing
and integrating training interventions in order to manage the
training process and to increase the potential of achieving peak
performance at appropriate time points.
The General Adaptation Syndrome
In the 1930s, Hans Selye, a pioneering researcher on the biological effects of
exposure to stressful stimuli, presented the basic concepts of the GAS in which a
three-stage response to stress (alarm, resistance, and exhaustion) was presented
(82). His later work expanded on these early findings by taking into consideration
both physical (9, 84, 85) and psychoemotional stress (20, 83, 86). While not
originally conceptualized in the context of physical training, over time the GAS has
become one of the foundational concepts used to explain periodization theories
(20, 29, 35). Any time the body experiences a novel, new, or more intense stress
than previously applied (e.g., lifting a heavier training load or a greater volume-
load; see chapter 18), the initial response, or alarm phase, is marked by an
accumulation of fatigue, soreness, stiffness, or reduction in energetic stores that
results in a reduction in performance capacity (20, 92). Depending on the
magnitude of the stress encountered by the athlete, this response may last
several hours, days, or weeks. After this initial response, the body moves into the
1582

resistance phase, when it adapts to the stimulus and returns to a normal
functional capacity. If the training stress is appropriately structured and not
excessive, these adaptive responses can result in specific biochemical, structural,
and mechanical adjustments that further elevate the athlete’s performance
capacity, resulting in what is termed supercompensation (91).
An additional factor that modulates the stress response to training is the
athlete’s psychological and emotional state (95, 96). If the athlete has chronic
elevations in psychological and emotional stress, the magnitude of the fatigue
response will be increased during the alarm phase and the time course for
recovery will be lengthened, resulting in an elongation of the resistance phase,
ultimately resulting in a delayed supercompensation response (38). As such, the
strength and conditioning professional must not only monitor the training loads
the athlete is exposed to but must also consider the athlete’s current
psychological and emotional state when manipulating training loads within the
periodized training plan. In this regard, the integration of a comprehensive
monitoring program can provide additional information that allows that strength
and conditioning professional to better manage the athlete’s exposure to training
stress and increase the potential for appropriate elevations in performance.
If, however, the stress persists (either physical or psychoemotional) for an
extended period of time, the athlete can move into the exhaustion phase. If this
occurs, the athlete is demonstrating an inability to adapt to the imposed stressors
and will present some of the same symptoms noted in the alarm phase.
Ultimately, when athletes reach the exhaustion phase, they are most likely
experiencing overreaching or overtraining responses (see chapter 24 for
additional information) (20). From a training perspective, excessive loading,
monotonous training, and overly varied training can all result in the occurrence of
the exhaustion phase. Additionally, the responses to training can be affected by
other nontraining-related stress (e.g., occupational issues, insufficient sleep,
relationship, poor diet) that can contribute to the overall stress level experienced
by the athlete. Ultimately, the strength and conditioning professional should strive
to avoid the occurrence of this phase of the GAS through the proper planning,
management (periodization), and monitoring of training stressors. Although the
actual dimensions (i.e., slope, magnitude, and timing) of the curve shown in
figure 22.2 are highly individualized, this figure represents the basic application of
the GAS to training responses.
Stimulus–Fatigue–Recovery–Adaptation Theory
The stimulus–fatigue–recovery–adaptation theory is an extension of the GAS and
suggests that training stimuli produce a general response (figure 22.3) that is
influenced by the overall magnitude of the training stressor (38, 92). Specifically,
the greater the overall magnitude of the workload encountered, the more fatigue
1583

accumulates and the longer the delay before complete recovery and adaption can
occur. As the athlete recovers from and adapts to the training stimuli, fatigue
dissipates, and preparedness and performance increase. If no new training
stimulus is introduced, a state of involution or detraining (i.e., a reduced overall
capacity, to below the current baseline) is observed. In contrast, if a new training
stimulus is introduced, the process is repeated. This basic pattern is present
whenever an athlete is exposed to a training exercise, session, day, or cycle
within a periodized training plan. It should be noted that while recovery is an
important part of the training process, it is not always necessary to reach a state
of complete recovery before engaging in a new bout or session of training (72).
The manipulation of workloads and training intensities through use of light and
heavy sessions or days of training can be used to modulate fatigue and recovery
responses (8, 26, 88) while allowing for fitness to be either increased or
maintained. Conceptually, this theory serves as the foundation for sequential
periodization models in that these models allow for the manipulation of various
training factors to modulate the athlete’s overall fatigue levels, rate of recovery,
and adaptive response to the training stimuli.
FIGURE 22.2 The general adaptation syndrome (GAS) and application to periodization.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 257. Adapted from A.J. Cunanan, B.H.
DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018):
787-797.; R.W. Fry, A.R. Morton, and D. Keast, “Periodisation of Training Stress-A Review,” Canadian Journal of Sports Science 17 (1992):
234-240.; Stone et al. (1982); Stone et al. (2007).
1584

Fitness–Fatigue Paradigm
Generally, a summation of the two primary training aftereffects (i.e., fitness and
fatigue) occurs in response to training interventions that influence the athlete’s
level of preparedness (15, 38, 107). In 1995, Zatsiorsky (106) presented the
classic explanation of these relationships as the two-factor model, more
commonly referred to as the fitness–fatigue paradigm (figure 22.4). Ultimately,
every training bout, session, or cycle creates both fatigue and fitness aftereffects,
which summate to create a state of preparedness (15, 106). When training loads
are the highest, fitness becomes elevated, but because of the high training loads,
a concomitant increase in fatigue occurs. When fitness and fatigue are summed in
this case, the level of fatigue results in a reduction in preparedness. On the other
hand, when training workloads are low, little fatigue occurs and minimal fitness is
developed, resulting in a low level of preparedness. Thus, the sequencing of
training loads becomes important in that it allows for training workloads to be
varied in a systematic manner. An important thing to remember is that fatigue
dissipates at a rate two-thirds faster than fitness, thus allowing preparedness to
become elevated if appropriate training strategies are used to retain fitness while
reducing fatigue (35, 38, 41). While the fitness–fatigue paradigm is classically
represented as one fatigue, fitness, and preparedness curve, it is likely that each
training factor stimulates its own individual fitness, fatigue, and preparedness
aftereffect response (15, 38, 41). These aftereffects are often considered to be
residual training effects and serve as a fundamental concept underlying the use of
sequential periodization models (35, 41). Ultimately, the residual training effects
of one training period have the potential to affect the level of preparedness in
subsequent training periods, depending on the overall structure of the periodized
training plan (35, 41).
1585

FIGURE 22.3 The stimulus–fatigue–recovery–adaptation theory, with interchangeable terminology.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 257. Adapted from A.J. Cunanan, B.H.
DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018):
787-797.; R.W. Fry, A.R. Morton, and D. Keast, “Periodisation of Training Stress-A Review,” Canadian Journal of Sports Science 17 (1992):
234-240.; Stone et al. (1982); Stone et al. (2007).
1586

FIGURE 22.4 The fitness–fatigue paradigm.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 260. Adapted from Stone et al. (2007)
and V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021).
1587

Periodization and Planning the Training Process
The development of a periodized training plan is based on three interdependent
levels: periodization, planning, and programming (table 22.1).
TABLE 22.1 Interrelationship of Periodization, Planning, and
Programming
Management
level
Structure
General description
Specific description
Macro-
management
Periodization
The bird’s-eye overview of the program
direction and goals of the training
process; typically depicted as the annual
or multiyear training plan
Uses the competitive schedule
to create the scaffold from
which training is planned and
implemented
Planning
Provides the model of periodization used
to guide the training process and
programmatic decisions
Applies a training model:
parallel, sequential, or emphasis
model
Programming Defines the structure of the actual
training interventions (modes and
methods)
Structures the training plan and
provides the modes and
methods used to create the
training program
Micro-
management
Adapted from Haff (2017); Haff (2021); Haff (2024).
When beginning the construction of a periodized training plan the first level, or
periodization level, provides the scaffold from which the training process is
developed (33, 35, 38). At this level, based on the competitive schedule, the
annual training plan is subdivided into various periods and phases to provide a
basic framework from which the detailed training plan is established. At the
second level, or planning level, a training model (i.e., parallel, sequential, or
emphasis model) is selected to guide programmatic decisions. Finally, once the
models of training are selected and aligned with the various periods and phases
contained within the annual plan, they can be used to inform the third level of the
process, which involves the actual construction of the training program (41). The
programming level is where the various modes, methods, and targeted training
strategies are implemented and the actual training loads (i.e., intensities and
volumes) and training structures (e.g., loading patterns and set types) are
prescribed (35, 41).
1588

Models of Periodization
While the scientific and coaching literature presents numerous models of
periodization, all models can be classified under three general models (figure
22.5).
Parallel Training Models
The parallel training models, as shown in figure 22.5, involve targeting all
training factors simultaneously within one training session, training day, series of
training days, or a microcycle (33, 35, 37, 38). Sometimes this approach is
referred to as the concurrent or complex parallel approach (4). This planning
approach aligns with the early stages of most long-term athlete development
models (61, 62) where youth athletes are exposed to multilateral training
strategies. Additionally, this approach works well with novice and developmental
athletes (38). A major concern with parallel models is that as the athlete develops
his or her total training load (i.e., volume or load, time dedicated to training, etc.)
must be continually increased (35) and may exceed his or her training tolerance
(51). As such, this model may not be the best option when working with
intermediate to elite athletes, who require greater training variation and stimulus
to continue to stimulate adaptation and elevate performance (16, 35, 37, 38).
With these athletes it may be warranted to implement different planning
strategies (i.e., emphasis or parallel models) to optimize the training process (38).
Sequential Training Models
Sequential training models, as shown in figure 22.5, were created to address
the limitations associated with the parallel model of training, such as the inability
to simultaneously develop multiple motor and technical abilities, the need for
longer preparation periods, and the inability to accommodate dense competitive
schedules (38, 52). These models are used to organize an individual or limited
number of training factors into a logical pattern that guides the athlete toward a
targeted outcome. This approach is ideally suited for athletes who require a
greater training stimulus than what can be provided with the parallel approach
(38).
This approach to organizing training has been successfully implemented with
individual sports such as weightlifting (97), cross-country skiing (87), cycling (23,
80), track and field (74), and aerobic endurance sports (53). Additionally, this
approach has been successfully implemented with team sports such as American
football (46), basketball (76), football (30), ice hockey (81), and team handball
(63).
1589

FIGURE 22.5 Three basic models of planning: parallel, emphasis, and sequential.
Reprinted by permission from G.G. Haff, Scientific Foundations and Practical Applications of Periodization (Human Kinetics, 2025), 111.
Emphasis Training Models
Emphasis training models, as shown in figure 22.5, contain aspects of both
parallel and sequential models of periodization (35, 37, 38). Similar to parallel
models, multiple training factors are targeted simultaneously but with varying
degrees of emphasis over time (38). Over time the degree of focus on the
individual training is shifted in a sequential manner that aligns with the periodized
training plan. Generally, when this model is implemented the training emphasis is
rotated every two weeks to optimize performance capacity (108). When varying
the emphasis some training factors will be undertaken with training loads that
stimulate adaptations, while some training factors are undertaken with training
loads that are used to maintain the athlete’s current state (38, 108). Additionally,
some training factors will be targeted with a minimal training dose, which would
result in a degree of detraining.
This training model is ideally suited for intermediate to advanced athletes who
compete in individual or team sports and have congested competitive schedules
(38). Examples of the use of this model can be seen in several individual sports,
such as track cycling (70), sprinting (27), and mixed martial arts (19). This model
has been also recommended for team-sport athletes (32) as well as tactical
athletes.
1590

Periodization Hierarchy
Ultimately, periodization is simply a means of organizing the planning of the
training process so that it is partitioned into specific time periods (table 22.2) (36,
37, 41). The multiyear training plan covers the most time but is the least detailed
plan within a periodized training structure. For example, it may involve the basic
progression of a college soccer player from her freshman to senior year and
contain key developmental goals that are targeted within each year of training.
This multiyear training structure is then subdivided into more detailed individual
annual training plans that are developed based on the athlete’s progression
through the various stages or benchmarks forecasted across the multiyear
training plan. In sports that have only one competitive season, such as American
football, an annual training plan would be represented as a macrocycle.
However, in a sport such as college track and field, the annual plan would be
divided into two macrocycles because of the indoor and outdoor seasons typical
of this college sport. Alternatively, if a high school athlete competes in American
football in the fall, basketball in the winter, and track and field in the spring, the
annual plan would be subdivided into three macrocycles. Typically, the macrocycle
lasts several months up to a year, depending on the sport or the number of sports
participated in within the year. Within each macrocycle are mesocycles, each
lasting several weeks to months, typically two to six weeks, with four weeks being
the most common duration. The number of mesocycles within each macrocycle
depends on the training targets and the length of the macrocycle within the
annual training plan. Each mesocycle is then broken down into individual
microcycles that last from several days to weeks; the most common duration is
one week (35, 38). Within each microcycle are training days that are further
subdivided into training sessions.
Periodization of training begins with general global training targets
set forth in the multiyear or annual training plan and becomes more
specific as the program is developed for the macro-, meso-, and
microcycles. For example, annual training plans set the general
pathway for a training year, while the other cycles provide the
structure that is used to guide the means, methods, and modes
used to create the training program that is used to guide the
athlete’s development toward the primary competitive targets.
TABLE 22.2 Periodization Cycles
Period
Duration
Description
1591

Period
Duration
Description
Multiyear training
plans
2-4 years
This contains interlinked annual training plans; the most common
multiyear plan is the quadrennial plan.
Annual training
plan
1 year
The overall annual training plan can contain a single or multiple
macrocycles. It can be subdivided into preparatory, competitive, and
transitional periods of training.
Macrocycle
Several months
to a year
It contains preparatory, competitive, and transitional periods of
training. If it encompasses one year, some authors refer to this as an
annual plan.
Mesocycle
2-6 weeks
This medium-sized training cycle is sometimes called a block of
training. It consists of microcycles that are linked together. The most
common duration is 4 weeks.
Microcycle
Several days to 2
weeks
This small-sized training cycle is comprised of multiple workouts. It
can range from several days to 2 weeks in duration; the most
common duration is 1 week (7 days).
Training day
1 day
One training day can contain multiple sessions. It is designed in the
context of the microcycle in which it is contained.
Training session
Several hours
It generally consists of several hours of training. If the session has
>30 min of rest between bouts of training, it should be considered as
having multiple workouts.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s
Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed., edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T.
Jones (Human Kinetics, 2025), 265. Based on Haff (2021); Issurin (2008); V. Issurin, Building the Modern
Athlete: Scientific Advancement & Training Innovation (Ultimate Athlete Concepts, 2015).; Y. Verkhoshansky
and M.C. Siff, Supertraining: Expanded Version, 6th ed. (Verkhoshansky, 2009).
1592

Periodization Periods
The overall variation and structure of the program design variables within each
individual meso- and microcycle are constructed based on the periods included in
the macrocycle or annual training plan (35, 36, 38). Across these periods of the
training plan, the volume and intensity of the training and conditioning program
generally receive the greatest attention, but the time spent acquiring and
perfecting sport-specific technique must also be considered when one is
constructing the overall periodized training plan (77). Ultimately, periodized
training plans systematically shift training foci from general nonspecific activities
of high volume and low intensity toward activities of lower volume and higher
intensities over a period of many weeks or months to help reduce the potential
for overtraining while optimizing performance capacities.
The basic sequencing of periodized training programs and how training
progresses through the various phases for specified training targets are very
similar to the sequencing and evolution of learning academic concepts. For
example, in academics we start with simple concepts and skills that progress to
more complex concepts; that is, we develop simple skills to provide a sound
foundation for learning more complex items. Ultimately, the periods within a
periodized training plan serve as the pathway for developing foundational
physical, psychological, and performance attributes into more complex sport-
specific targets.
In the classic periodization literature, the major divisions of training are
classified as the preparatory, competitive, and transition periods (34, 66, 89).
Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89) modified this classic model to include a
“first transition” between the preparatory and competitive periods of training.
Based on this structure, some periodization models often contain four distinct but
interrelated training periods: preparatory, first transition, competitive, and second
transition. Figure 22.6 presents the basic periodization model described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89). This model is often applied for novice athletes
with a lower training status. Generally, in this application, intensity begins lower
and gradually increases, while volume starts higher and slowly decreases as the
athlete becomes more conditioned. It is important to note that not all novice
athletes are able to tolerate large changes in these variables and that smaller
fluctuations may be required (89, 98, 99). It is also important to note that even
though these fluctuations are often represented graphically as straight lines, the
volume and intensity progressions are in fact nonlinear because of the
fluctuations in the loadings that occur at the micro- and mesocycle levels (34, 35,
77). This basic misunderstanding of the classic models of periodization has
resulted in these types of models being falsely termed linear periodization models
1593

(35, 51, 77, 93). Ultimately, the term linear periodization creates a false narrative
because one of the major tenets of periodization is the removal of linearity from
the training process (38, 51, 72, 77, 93).
FIGURE 22.6 Matveyev’s model of periodization (appropriate for novices).
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 268.; M.H. Stone and H.O. O’Bryant,
Weight Training: A Scientific Approach (Burgess, 1987).
Advanced athletes tend to train closer to their abilities and have smaller
adaptation windows. Therefore, these athletes require greater training variation
as well as higher volumes and intensities to allow them to continue to experience
appropriate training stimuli (77). For example, Zatsiorsky and colleagues (107)
demonstrate that a stimulating load for a novice athlete would be a maintenance
load at best for advanced athletes. To address this issue, the shift from higher-
volume to higher-intensity training can occur earlier in the preparatory phase,
with higher overall training volumes as compared to those in the base model
presented in figure 22.6.
Preparatory Period
In outlining a periodized training plan, the starting point is usually the
preparatory period. This period occurs when there are no competitions, and
technical, tactical, or sport-specific work is limited. This period often corresponds
to what is termed the off-season. The central goal of this period of training is to
develop a base level of conditioning to increase the athlete’s ability to tolerate
1594

more intense training. Based on the model presented in figure 22.6, the
conditioning activities would begin with relatively low intensities and high
volumes: long, slow distance running or swimming; low-intensity plyometrics; and
high-repetition resistance training with light to moderate resistances. Traditionally,
the preparatory period is subdivided into general and specific phases. The
general preparatory phase typically occurs during the early part of the period
and often targets the development of a general physical base (38, 69). This early
part of the preparatory period includes high training volumes, low training
intensities, and a larger variety of training means that are structured to develop
general motor abilities and skills (49, 65). The specific preparatory phase
occurs after the completion of the general preparatory phase and involves a shift
in training focus. From the training base that has been established, this phase
expands the athlete’s training base through an increased emphasis on sport-
specific training activities that prepare the athlete for the competitive period (18,
69). During the preparatory period, resistance training phases can be created to
depict more refined differences in training intensity and volume. In order, these
are the hypertrophy (or strength–endurance) phase and the basic strength phase
(89, 91).
Hypertrophy or Strength–Endurance Phase
The hypertrophy phase, which is also referred to as the strength–endurance
phase, generally occurs during the early portion of the preparatory period (i.e.,
the general preparatory phase) (24, 40, 41, 93). During this phase, the training
intensity is low to moderate, and the overall volume is high. The primary goals
during this phase are to enhance work capacity and increase muscle mass. This
development serves as the foundation for the higher-intensity training in
subsequent phases and periods (42, 43). With strength or power athletes, the
primary target might be to stimulate hypertrophic effects while increasing
strength–endurance. With aerobic endurance athletes, the primary goal would be
to increase strength–endurance without significantly increasing hypertrophy.
Regardless of the sport or athlete being trained, it is generally accepted that
during the general preparatory phase, sport conditioning activities may not be
specific to the athlete’s sport. However, as the athlete moves into the specific
preparatory phase, over several weeks the training activities will become more
sport specific. For example, sprinters may begin the general preparatory phase
with longer-distance runs (longer than their competitive distance, not traditional
distance running; for example, a 100 m sprinter may do 400 m runs to establish a
foundation) at slower speeds in conjunction with lower-intensity plyometrics such
as double-leg bounding and hopping, as well as more basic resistance exercises
that are not necessarily biomechanically or structurally similar to running (e.g.,
1595

back squat and leg curl). Generally, the athlete performs resistance training with
low to moderate intensities for high volumes (table 22.3).
TABLE 22.3 A Periodized Model for Resistance Training
Period
Preparatory
First
transition
Competition
Second
transition
Phase
General preparatory
Specific
preparatory
Precompetitive
Main competitive
Postcompetitive
Season
Off-season
Preseason
In-season
Postseason
Emphasis Hypertrophy/strength
endurance
Basic
strength
Strength/power Peaking or Maintenance Active rest
Intensity
Low to moderate
High
Low to very
high
Very
high to
very
low
Moderate to
high
Recreational
activities (may
not involve
resistance
training)
50%-75% 1RM
80%-95%
1RM
87%-95%
1RMa
50% to
≥93%
1RM
85%-93%
1RM
30%-85% of
1RMb
Volume
High
Moderate
to high
Low
Very
low
Low to
moderate
3-6 setsc
2-6 setsc
2-5 setsc
1-3
setsc
~2-5 setsc
8-20 reps
2-6 reps
2-5 reps
1-3
reps
3-6 reps
aThese percentages of 1RM apply to nonpower core exercises.
bThese percentages of 1RM apply to power exercises. The actual percentage used to elicit power
development depends on the exercise that is used. For more information, see Kawamori and Haff (55).
cThese recommendations do not include warm-up sets and represent only target sets for core exercises (40);
they also do not include lower-intensity recovery days that are often part of a periodized training plan (40,
89, 92).
Adapted from Haff and Haff (2012); Stone et al. (1981); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (1982);
Stone et al. (2007).
However, it is important to note that throughout this phase, daily variations in
training intensity and workload will facilitate recovery (35, 38). Additionally,
recovery weeks or microcycles may be placed throughout the phase and most
often at the end of the phase before the next phase of training begins.
The hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase involves low to
moderate intensity (50%-75% of the 1RM) and high volumes (3 to
1596

6 sets of 8-20 repetitions).
Basic Strength Phase
In the later portion of the preparatory period, during the specific preparatory
phase, the primary aim of the basic strength phase is to increase the strength
of the muscles that are essential to the primary sport movements (12-14). For
example, the sprinter’s running program would progress to include interval sprints
of a moderate distance and more complex and specialized plyometric drills. The
resistance training program also becomes more specific to the sport (e.g., squat,
power clean, Bulgarian squat) and involves heavier loads performed at lower
volumes than in the hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase (table 22.3). As
with the hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase, daily variations in training
load facilitate recovery (35, 38).
The basic strength phase involves higher intensity (80%-95% of
the 1RM) and moderate to high volumes (2 to 6 sets of 2 to 6
repetitions).
First Transition Period
As originally described by Stone and colleagues (89-91), the first transition
period is a link between the preparatory and competitive periods. Classically, the
resistance training in this period focuses on the development of strength and
power as noted in Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer’s (89) seminal paper on the
periodization of strength training. The central aim of this period is to shift the
training focus toward the elevation of strength and its translation into power
development (89, 90). In order to maximize this process and facilitate recovery,
variations are observed in training intensity and workload at the microcycle level
(35, 38). Additionally, the last week of the period is marked by reduced volume,
intensity, or both to achieve recovery before the beginning of the competitive
period.
The main phase within the first transition period is the strength/power
phase. In this phase, for example, the sprinter’s interval and speed training
intensifies to near competitive pace; speed drills are performed (e.g., sled towing,
sprints against resistance, and uphill sprints); plyometric drills mimic sprinting;
and the resistance training program involves performing power and explosive
exercises at low to very high loads with low volumes. As explained in chapter 18,
the load assignments for power exercises do not follow the typical %RM–
repetition relationship, but their relative intensities are elevated during this phase
(table 22.3). Specifically, the exercises selected in this phase can dictate the
loading that is used (55). For example, the development of power may be
1597

facilitated with a load of 80% of the 1RM with power cleans performed from the
hang (55) or floor (17), while a load of 50% to 70% of the 1RM may be used
with the bench press throw when the aim is to maximize power development
(55). Ultimately, to address both strength and power development, a mixed
training approach is warranted in which heavy- and low-load training is used to
optimize both attributes (44).
The strength/power phase involves low to very high loads
(30%-95% of the 1RM, depending on the exercise) and low
volumes (2 to 5 sets for 2 to 5 repetitions).
Competitive Period
The central training target during the competitive period is preparing the
athlete for competition by further increasing strength and power via additional
increases in training intensity while decreasing volume. This process can be a
delicate balancing act, because adequate volume and intensity of training are
needed to maintain competitive preparedness, and reductions in volume,
intensity, or both are needed to optimize performance. To understand this
conundrum, consider the fitness–fatigue paradigm presented earlier. If training
workloads (volume or intensity) are reduced too much, fatigue will be reduced,
but there will be a concomitant decrease in overall fitness that results in a
reduction in competitive preparedness. Also during this period, time spent
practicing sport-specific skills and tactics increases dramatically, and a
proportional decrease occurs in time spent performing physical conditioning
activities such as resistance training. For example, a sprinter places even more
emphasis on speed, reaction time, sprint-specific plyometric drills, and technique
training. The competitive period may last for one or two weeks for some sports in
which a peaking program is employed (6, 36, 69). Peaking programs attempt to
place the athlete in peak condition for about one or two weeks. Trying to extend
this to longer durations ultimately results in reduced performance capacity as a
result of reduction in fitness or potential overtraining (36, 38). Depending on the
load-reduction strategy employed, peaking programs result in a progressive shift
from higher-intensity training toward lower-intensity work designed to reduce
fatigue as the athlete moves through the taper before competition (36). As shown
in table 22.3 (page 730), resistance training may range between 50% and ≥93%
of the 1RM, depending on where athletes are in the peaking program.
For team sports, this period spans an entire season and may last for many
months, requiring the use of a maintenance program (5). Because of the
prolonged duration of the competitive period in this situation, the intensity and
volume of training must be manipulated on a microcycle basis to maintain
1598

strength and power while managing the fatigue associated with a frequent
competition schedule. Generally, a maintenance program is marked by moderate-
to high-intensity training (e.g., 85%-93% 1RM) at low to moderate volumes. At
the microcycle level, the training loads are modulated based on the training,
travel, and competitive schedule. Careful monitoring of the athlete’s performance
capacity and recovery is critical during the team-sport athlete’s competitive
period.
The competitive period includes peaking and maintenance. For
peaking, athletes use very high to low intensities (50% to ≥93% of
the 1RM) and very low volume (1 to 3 sets of 1 to 3 repetitions) for
one to two weeks. For maintenance, athletes modulate training
between moderate and high intensities (85%-93% of the 1RM)
with moderate volumes (about 2 to 5 sets of 3 to 6 repetitions).
Second Transition Period (Active Rest)
Between the competitive season and the next annual training plan or the
preparatory period of a macrocycle, a second transition period is often used to
create a linkage (89). This period is sometimes referred to as an active rest or
restoration period and generally lasts for one to four weeks (38). It is important
to note that if active rest is extended for a prolonged duration, athletes will
require a much longer preparatory period to regain their performance capacities
(39). Therefore, it is generally recommended that the second transition period
last no longer than four weeks unless an athlete requires additional time to
recover from an injury. During this period, aggressive training immediately after
the peak performance or end of the maintenance phase should be avoided so
athletes can rehabilitate injuries and rest physically and mentally (12-14). For
example, a sprinter may engage in recreational activities such as volleyball, racket
sports, and swimming in a leisurely manner and perform very low-volume, non–
sport-specific resistance training with very low loads. A secondary use of the
active rest concept is to structure one-week breaks between long phases (three
weeks) or periods of training. The purpose is to create an unloading week to
prepare the body for the subsequent phase or period of training. The practice of
reducing the training load via the reduction of training intensity and volume is
believed by many strength and conditioning professionals to reduce overtraining
potential.
The second transition (active rest) provides a period of time in
which athletes can rehabilitate injuries and refresh both physically
and mentally before beginning a new annual training plan or
1599

macrocycle. This period should not last longer than four weeks,
because long periods with reduced training will require the athlete
to engage in a longer preparatory period to regain sporting form.
1600

Applying Sport Seasons to the Periodization
Periods
In practical terms, periodization involves a logical, systematic variation and
integration of training to direct the training responses while managing fatigue and
optimizing performance in accordance with the seasonal demands of the sport
and athletes. Based on the competitive season, the overall annual plan or
macrocycle is structured to sequentially develop specific attributes required by the
athlete. To avoid monotony, staleness, and overtraining potential, the training
program must involve structured variation of key training variables (e.g., volume,
intensity, training frequency, training foci, exercise selection) (41). Classically,
most intercollegiate and professional sports have an annual schedule that includes
an off-season, preseason, in-season, and postseason. These seasons are easy to
relate to the periods in a periodized training model (figure 22.7).
Off-Season
The off-season should be considered the preparatory period; it typically lasts from
the end of the postseason to the beginning of the preseason, which can be about
six weeks before the first major competition (although this varies greatly). This
preparatory period is subdivided into general and specific preparatory phases that
are broken down into mesocycles; these interlink to prepare the athlete for the
subsequent competitive season. For example, the athlete may complete several
rotations of mesocycles that focus on hypertrophy/strength endurance and basic
strength (figure 22.7). Ultimately, these cyclical rotations are selected based on
the sport and the athlete’s needs. For example, if an American football player
needs to gain muscle mass, more mesocycles that target the hypertrophy phase
will be prescribed.
1601

FIGURE 22.7 Relationship of periodization periods to seasons and strength training focus. HP =
hypertrophy/strength endurance; BS = basic strength; AR = active rest; SP =strength/power.
Adapted from G.G. Haff, “The Essentials of Periodisation,” in Strength and Conditioning for Sports Performance, 2nd ed., edited by I. Jeffreys
and J. Moody (Routledge, 2021).
Preseason
After the completion of the off-season, the preseason is used to lead into the first
major competition. The first transition period is often undertaken at this time with
a focus on the strength/power phase of resistance training. This time is used to
prepare the athlete for the subsequent competitive period. It is very important to
note that the preseason is not the time to build the foundational physical
capacities needed for the sport; this should occur primarily in the off-season. The
preseason is designed to capitalize on the off-season and elevate the athlete’s
performance capacity during the competitive period.
In-Season
The competitive, or in-season, period contains all the contests scheduled for the
given year, including any tournament games. Most sports have a long season that
requires multiple mesocycles arranged around key contests. Thus, a long
competitive season (12-16+ weeks) presents unique programming challenges—in
these situations, three- or four-week mesocycle blocks that unload the athlete in
the 
last 
microcycle 
to 
allow 
for 
fatigue 
reduction 
and 
performance
supercompensation before critical contests (41). This does not mean that the
athlete is in poor condition for the other contests, because strategically varying
where training days occur in conjunction with altering training intensities and
volumes across each microcycle can modulate preparedness and elevate
performance during congested competitive schedules. Specifically, training
1602

intensity and volume are increased or decreased to maintain physical capacities
while reducing fatigue and elevating preparedness before the competitive
engagements. During the in-season, monitoring activities are used to make
strategic decisions about how to vary training loads to more precisely prescribe
training to align with the athlete’s current state (11).
Postseason
After the final contest, the postseason or second transition period provides the
athlete with a relative or active rest before the beginning of the next year’s off-
season or preparatory period. It is important to remember that the longer the
postseason, the greater the chance for detraining, which results in an increased
need for a longer general preparatory phase during the next off-season (38).
1603

Undulating Versus Linear Periodization Models
For better or worse, contemporary periodization literature has adopted the terms
linear and nonlinear when referring to periodization models. However, it should be
noted that a central tenet of periodization is the removal of linearity from training
(35, 38, 45, 51, 65, 72, 88). In fact, when developing his original model of
periodization Matveyev used Yakovlev’s concept of supercompensation (104, 105)
as the basis for the need for training to be applied in a nonlinear and rhythmic
manner (59, 103). Matveyev (65) noted that removing linearity from the training
process and implementing appropriate training load variations provides a superior
method of training.
Often the traditional resistance training model is falsely referred to as linear
due to the gradual and progressive mesocycle increases in intensity over time (7,
51, 77). However, a closer look at the traditional model as described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89, 91) and within the literature (51) shows that the
traditional model contains nonlinear variation in training intensity and volume-load
at the microcycle level and throughout the mesocycle. Regardless of this, the
nonlinear periodization model has been introduced in the strength and
conditioning industry (2, 58, 79). Alternatively, this model is sometimes described
as an undulating or daily undulating periodization model because it involves
larger daily (i.e., within the microcycle) fluctuations in the load and volume (e.g.,
repetitions and volume-load) of the assigned core resistance training exercise. For
example, when using this programming strategy one might perform 4 sets with a
6RM load (strength focus) on the first day of the week (e.g., Tuesday), 3 sets with
a 10RM (hypertrophic focus) on the next training day (e.g., Thursday), and 5 sets
with a 3RM load (power focus) on the last training day (e.g., Saturday). In this
case the load, volume (e.g., repetitions and volume-load), and training focus are
all modified within the microcycle. These modifications are in contrast to what
occurs with the traditional periodization model, falsely referred to as the
linear periodization model, according to which the athlete performs the same
number of sets and repetitions across the training days and varies the training
load. For example, the athlete may perform 4 sets of 6 at 85% of the 1RM on the
first day of training, at 75% of the 1RM on the second day, and at 65% of the
1RM on the third day to basically train using a heavy-to-light training structure
and introduce variation to the training stimulus. While the traditional model
appears to vary only intensity because the repetitions do not change, one must
remember that the volume-load changes in this model result in undulations in
workload and training volume, supporting the idea that the traditional model is in
fact nonlinear and should not be classified as linear (51, 88).
1604

Some research studies suggest that the daily undulating model is more
effective than the traditional model (21, 57, 67, 68, 79), although other evidence
suggests that no difference exists between these models (2, 10, 31, 78, 100, 101)
or that traditional models are superior (47, 48, 74, 75, 101). Proponents of the
daily undulating model suggest that one of its strengths is the absence of
accumulated neural fatigue caused by extended, ever-increasing training
intensities common to the traditional model (56). Conversely, proponents of the
traditional model suggest that the overall high volume-loads of training in the
undulating model result in greater peripheral fatigue and increased risk of injury
because of the high levels of metabolic fatigue this type of programming can
stimulate (74, 75). Additionally, examination of the stimulus–fatigue–recovery–
adaptation theory (figure 22.3) and the fatigue–fitness paradigm (figure 22.4)
indicates that the daily undulating model has the potential to decrease athlete
preparedness because of accumulated fatigue that occurs with higher volume-
load training sessions. Some authors suggest that, based on the GAS, this
response may actually increase the potential for overtraining with higher-level
athletes (35, 94) and result in an increased injury risk for athletes using this
model in conjunction with their sport-based training.
1605

Example of an Annual Training Plan
A sample approach to designing a full annual training plan (i.e., macrocycle for
sports with one competitive season) spanning all four sport seasons is presented
in figure 22.8.
The annual plan example provided in this chapter defines a macrocycle that
lasts from May 1 until April 28. This macrocycle is subdivided into four seasons:
off-season (May 1-August 20), preseason (August 21-November 5), in-season
(November 6-April 14), and postseason (begins on April 15). Since there is only
one competitive season in this annual training plan a single macrocycle structure
has been used. This macrocycle is then subdivided into 14 mesocycles, which
range in length between two and four weeks. Note: The primary focus of this
sample annual training plan is to explain how to subdivide the annual plan and to
design the resistance training component. Although other modes of training are
described briefly (e.g., plyometrics, anaerobic conditioning, aerobic endurance)
and can be easily incorporated into the annual plan, this example is not intended
to illustrate every aspect of a strength and conditioning program for basketball.
For more information on how to structure an annual training plan, consult NSCA’s
Guide to Program Design (41).
Off-Season
Following the postseason active rest period, the athlete should be rested and
ready to begin off-season (preparatory period) training. For this example, this
preparatory period lasts about 16 weeks, from May 1 until August 20. The goal of
this period is to establish a base level of conditioning to increase the athlete’s
tolerance for more intense training in later phases and periods. In this example,
mesocycle 1 is used to expose the athlete to initial strength and conditioning
activities at low intensities and volumes to reintroduce them to training. Across
the first two microcycles training intensity increases in preparation for
performance testing that is planned for microcycle 3. During these first three
weeks training loads are applied based on the athlete’s rating of perceived
exertion or based on of the repetition-in-reserve scale presented in chapter 18.
During microcycle 3 the training loads for all non-tested activities will be reduced
so that the athletes can partake in a series of initial pretesting to establish the
initial training loads for the exercises in the second mesocycle. In later
mesocycles, when more or other exercises are added, the training loads can be
estimated from loads used in similar exercises or can be determined from RM
testing. For example, the strength and conditioning professional can reasonably
predict training load for the hang clean from the tested power clean maximum, or
the actual RM load could be measured. Other monitoring tests related to
1606

basketball are shoulder and hip flexibility tests, 30-15 intermittent fitness test,
300-yard (274 m) shuttle, line drill, T-test, vertical jump, isometric mid-thigh pull,
and skinfold measurements (see chapter 14 for testing protocols).
The resistance training component holds higher priority in the off-season, and
an athlete may follow a split routine of four or more training days per week. In
this example, the basketball player begins the off-season with a total body, three-
times-per-week regimen but soon progresses to four training days per week with
variations in training intensity across the microcycle to allow fatigue to be
managed. These advancements also involve a gradual increase in loading, with
associated decreases in training volume as the athlete shifts his or her training
focus toward maximizing strength development. Other training includes sprint and
agility training as well as plyometrics and metabolic conditioning. These
conditioning workouts are scheduled on nonresistance training days, and flexibility
training should be emphasized in the warm-up and cool-down portions of each
training session.
FIGURE 22.8 Sample annual plan for a female basketball athlete.
Preseason
After undertaking one or two unloading weeks following the cessation of the off-
season training period, the athlete begins the preseason period of training. For
this example, the period covers 11 weeks (August 21-October 5). The goals of the
preseason are to increase the intensity of sport-specific training and the attention
given to basketball drills and skills. The resistance training portion is planned for
three days per week and focuses primarily on strength and power outcomes.
Other training modes (e.g., plyometrics and anaerobic conditioning) hold high
priority, especially if they directly contribute to basketball training.
1607

In-Season
After an unloading week following the preseason, the athlete is ready to begin the
competitive period of training. The in-season period lasts approximately 22
weeks, spanning a time period from November until April (including a four-week
tournament period, although it could last longer). The goals for the in-season are
to maintain and possibly improve strength, power, flexibility, and anaerobic
conditioning. The time constraints of games, skill and strategy practice, and travel
result in a lower volume of off-court training activities. Due to multiple games
each week, resistance training may be limited to 30 minutes, one to three times
per week, consisting of an undulating regimen of varying volume-loads and
relative intensities. Power and basketball-specific nonpower core exercises
predominate, with assistance exercises added for balance. See the sample in-
season program near the end of this chapter. Plyometric sessions should be
alternated with resistance training and conducted once or twice weekly,
depending on the number of games.
On days when no resistance training is scheduled, 15 to 20 minutes of various
short sprint intervals could be performed once or twice weekly during practice.
Speed, agility, and other running conditioning can be incorporated into practice
time, and flexibility training can be part of the practice and game warm-up and
cool-down. Two or three days of rest should be afforded between resistance
training, plyometrics, and sprint interval sessions, depending on the game
schedule. This period is similar to the previous training period in that the majority
of the athlete’s time is spent on skill and strategy development, with the
remainder devoted to conditioning.
The athlete is in good condition from the previous mesocycles, so she should
be able not only to maintain that condition but also to peak again if the team
continues in the conference tournament. If the tournament game schedule does
not allow for more than one resistance training session per week, the athlete
should perform all the week’s power and core exercises (if time allows) and omit
the assistance exercises. Two examples of specific weekly tournament schedules
are presented near the end of this chapter.
Postseason (Active Rest Period)
Following the completion of the competitive season is a (second) transition period
of active rest with no formal or structured workouts. For this example, the
transition period lasts a month (April 15-May 12). The goal of the period is for the
athlete to recuperate physically and psychologically from the long in-season.
Recreational games and fitness activities include swimming, jogging, circuit
weight training, volleyball, racquetball, and informal basketball. All activities are
performed at low intensities with low volumes.
1608

Reviewing the Annual Plan Example
For any periodization model to function optimally, the sport coach and the
strength and conditioning professional must plan the program together to share
goals and strategies. This is a critical issue in that working together allows all the
training factors that the athlete will engage in to be integrated so as to better
manage the training stress and modulate fatigue and recovery. Without the
cooperation of all involved professionals, optimal performance cannot be fully
achieved.
The example in this chapter is a representation of only one periodization model
that could be used to structure training for a sample athlete. Other athletes or
sports may require subtle to radical variations in the structure presented here. It
is important to remember that a multitude of periodization models can be
adapted to meet the needs of the various athletes and sports.
1609

Conclusion
Periodization is a process through which the athlete’s training is logically and
systematically organized to optimize preparedness and increase performance
potential for the most important competitions. The annual training plan (year of
training) is divided into macrocycles that contain preparatory, competitive, and
transition periods. Each period is subdivided into mesocycles that target specific
phases of development: hypertrophy/strength endurance, basic strength, or
strength/power. Transitions are used to link mesocycles or macrocycles and
provide the athlete with an unloading period that enhances recovery. The overall
structure of the macrocycle, mesocycle, and individual microcycles is dictated by
the individual sport’s competitive season and demands.
Off-Season
Female College Basketball Center
16 weeks: May 1-August 20
Mesocycle 1
May 1-May 14
Focus: Basic strength
Microcycles 1-2 (2 weeks)
Day
Exercise
Week 1
Week 2
Sets
Reps
Intensity
Sets
Reps
Intensity
Mon/Fri
Power clean
2
3/1a
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
3/1a
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Back squat
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
5
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Bench press
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
5
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Single-leg squat
2
8/8b
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
8/8b
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Lying triceps extension
2
8
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
8
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Glute ham raise
2
10
5-6 RPE
3
10
7-7.5 RPE
a3/1 represents a cluster set with a 20-second rest between each rep.
b8/8 = 8 reps per side.
1610

Microcycles 1-2 (2 weeks)
(4-5 RIR)
(2-3 RIR)
Abdominal crunch
2
20
3
20
Wed
Hang power clean
2
3
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
3
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Clean pull (floor)
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
10
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Clean grip Romanian deadlift
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
10
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Lat pulldown
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
10
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Biceps curl
2
5
5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)
3
10
7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Abdominal crunch
2
20
3
20
a3/1 represents a cluster set with a 20-second rest between each rep.
b8/8 = 8 reps per side.
Mesocycle 1
May 15-May 21
Focus: Initial pretesting
Microcycle 3 (1 week)
5RM power exercises
Power clean
Power snatch
10RM for assistance exercises
Lat pulldown
Biceps curl
Lying triceps extension
Upright row
5RM for nonpower core exercises
Back squat
Bench press
Other testing
Sit and reach
Shoulder elevation
30-15 intermittent fitness test
Line drill
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pull test
Body composition (skinfolds)
Mesocycle 2
1611

May 22-June 18
Focus: Hypertrophy
Microcycles 4-6 (3 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Mon/Fri
Back squat
3
10
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
90%-94%
10RM
Incline bench press
3
10
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
90%-94%
10RM
Single-leg squat
3
10/10a
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
90%-94%
10RM
Three-way shoulder
3
10/10/10b
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
90%-94%
10RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add load if possible
Abdominal exercisec
3
25
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power clean
3
10
75%-89% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89%
10RM
Clean grip deadlift
3
10
75%-89% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89%
10RM
Clean grip RDL
3
10
75%-89% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89%
10RM
Lat pulldown
3
10
75%-89% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89%
10RM
Abdominal exercisec
3
25
Microcycle 7 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 7
Mon/Fri
Back squat
3
10
70%-74% 10RM
Incline bench press
3
10
70%-74% 10RM
Single-leg squat
3
10/10a
70%-74% 10RM
Abdominal exercisec
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power clean
3
10
70%-74% 10RM
a10/10 = 10 per leg.
b10/10/10 = 10 front raise, 10 side lateral raise, 10 reverse fly.
cAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch,
Russian twist.
1612

Microcycles 4-6 (3 weeks)
Clean grip deadlift
3
10
70%-74% 10RM
Clean grip RDL
3
10
70%-74% 10RM
Abdominal exercisec
3
20
a10/10 = 10 per leg.
b10/10/10 = 10 front raise, 10 side lateral raise, 10 reverse fly.
cAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch,
Russian twist.
Mesocycle 3
June 19-July 16
Focus: Basic strength
Microcycles 8-10 (3 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Mon/Fri
Power clean
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Back squat
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Bench press
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Lying triceps extension
2
10
75%-79% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
Upright row
2
10
75%-79%10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Snatch grip deadlift
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Snatch grip mid-thigh pull
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Lat pulldown
2
10
70%-74% 10RM
75%-79% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
Hammer curl
2
10
70%-74% 10RM
75%-79%10RM
80%-84% 10RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Microcycle 11 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 11
Mon/Fri
Power clean
3
5
70%-74% 5RM
Back squat
3
5
70%-74% 5RM
Bench press
3
5
70%-74% 5RM
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch, Russian twist.
1613

Microcycles 8-10 (3 weeks)
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Snatch grip deadlift
3
5
70%-74% 5RM
Snatch grip mid-thigh pull
3
5
70%-74% 5RM
Lat pulldown
2
10
60%-69% 5RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch, Russian twist.
Mesocycle 4
July 17-August 13
Focus: Basic strength
Microcycles 12-13 (2 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 12
Week 13
Mon/Fri
Hang power snatch
5
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Back squat
5
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Strict press
5
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Leg (knee) curl
3
12
70%-74% 12RM
75%-79% 12RM
Seated calf raise
3
12
70%-74% 12RM
75%-79% 12RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power clean
5
5
70%-74% 5RM
75%-79% 5RM
Clean pull (floor)
5
5
70%-74% 5RM
75%-79% 5RM
Bent-over row
5
5
70%-74% 5RM
75%-79% 5RM
Barbell biceps curl
3
12
65%-69% 12RM
70%-74% 12 RM
Triceps pushdown
3
12
65%-69% 12RM
70%-74% 12 RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
25
Microcycles 14-15 (2 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 14
Week 15
Mon/Fri
Hang power snatch
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Back squat
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch, Russian twist.
1614

Microcycles 12-13 (2 weeks)
Strict press
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Leg (knee) curl
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
80%-84% 8RM
Seated calf raise
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
80%-84% 8RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power clean
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Clean pull (floor)
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Bent-over row
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Barbell biceps curl
3
8
70%-74% 8RM
75%-79% 8RM
Triceps pushdown
3
8
70%-74% 8RM
75%-79% 8RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch, Russian twist.
Mesocycle 4
August 14-August 20
Focus: Initial pretesting
Microcycle 16 (1 week)
3RM power exercises
Power clean
Power snatch
8RM for assistance exercises
Lat pulldown
Biceps curl
Lying triceps extension
Upright row
3RM for nonpower core exercises
Back squat
Bench press
Other testing
Sit and reach
Shoulder elevation
30-15 intermittent fitness test
Line drill
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pull test
Body composition (skinfolds)
Preseason
1615

Female College Basketball Center
11 weeks: August 21-November 5
Mesocycle 5
August 21-September 17
Focus: Strength/power 1
Microcycle 17 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 17
Mon/Fri
Push jerk
5
5
75%-79% 5RM
Back squat
5
5
80%-84% 5RM
Incline bench press
5
5
80%-84% 5RM
Biceps curl
3
10
75%-79% 10RM
Dip
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 15% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Power clean
5
5/1b
80%-84% 1RM
Clean pull (floor)
5
5
80%-84% 5RM
Romanian deadlift
5
5
75%-79% 5RM
Pendlay row
3
10
75%-79% 10RM
Pull-up
3
10
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Microcycles 18-19 (2 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 18
Week 19
Mon
Push jerk
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Back squat
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Incline bench press
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Biceps curl
3
8
80%-84% 8RM
Dip
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Wed
Power clean
3
5/1b
80%-84% 1RM
85%-89% 1RM
Clean pull (floor)
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bCluster set with 20 s between reps.
1616

Microcycle 17 (1 week)
Romanian deadlift
3
8
85%-89% 5RM
90%-94% 5RM
Pendlay row
3
10
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
Pull-up
3
10
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Fri
Push jerk
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Quarter back squat (from pins)
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Closed-grip bench press
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Hammer curl
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
80%-84% 8RM
Triceps pushdown
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
80%-84% 8RM
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Microcycle 20 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 20
Mon/Fri
Push jerk
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Back squat
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Incline bench press
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Biceps curl
3
8
70%-74% 8RM
Lying triceps extension
3
8
70%-74% 8RM
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Power clean
3
3/1b
75%-79% 1RM
Clean pull (floor)
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Romanian deadlift
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Pendlay row
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
Pull-up
3
8
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bCluster set with 20 s between reps.
Mesocycle 6
September 18-October 15
Focus: Strength/power 2
1617

Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 21
Mon
Hang power clean
5
3
80%-84% 3RM
Front squat
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
Clean pull (thigh block)
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
Push press
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
Dip
3
8
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Wed
Overhead squat
5
3
75%-79% 3RM
Hang power snatch
5
3
75%-79% 3RM
Snatch pull (floor)
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
Snatch grip Romanian deadlift
3
5
85%-89% 5RM
Pull-up
3
10
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Fri
Push jerk
5
3
70%-74% 3RM
Jump squatb
5
3
45%-49% 1RM
Quarter front squat
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
Closed-grip bench press
3
5
75%-79% 5RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Microcycles 22-23 (2 weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 22
Week 23
Mon
Push jerk
4
3
85%-89% 3RM
90%-94% 3RM
Hang power clean
4
3
80%-84% 3RM
85%-89% 3RM
Front squat
5
3
90%-94% 3RM
80%-84% 3RM
Clean pull (floor)
5
3
80%-84% 3RM
85%-89% 3RM
Dip
3
8
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Wed
Snatch grip jump shrugc
4
3
45%-49% 1RM
50%-54% 1RM
Hang power snatch
4
3
70%-74% 3RM
75%-79% 3RM
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based off back squat 1RM.
cLoad based off power snatch 1RM.
1618

Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Snatch pull (thigh block)
5
3
85%-89% 3RM
90%-94% 3RM
Snatch grip Romanian deadlift
5
3
80%-84% 3RM
85%-89% 3RM
Pull-up
3
10
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Fri
Push jerk
4
3
70%-74% 3RM
75%-79% 3RM
Jump squatb
4
3
45%-49% 1RM
50%-54% 1RM
Quarter front squat
5
3
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Closed-grip bench press
5
3
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Microcycle 24 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 24
Mon
Hang power clean
3
2
70%-74% 2RM
Front squat
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Clean pull (thigh block)
3
3
80%-84% 3RM
Push press
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Dip
3
8
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Wed
Snatch grip jump shrugc
3
2
50%-54% 1RM
Hang power snatch
3
2
70%-74% 2RM
Snatch pull (thigh block)
3
3
80%-84% 3RM
Snatch grip Romanian deadlift
3
3
75%-79% 3RM
Pull-up
3
8
Add weight if possible (use band if needed)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
Fri
Push jerk
3
2
70%-74% 2RM
Jump squatb
3
2
50%-54% 1RM
Quarter front squat
3
3
80%-84% 3RM
Closed-grip bench press
3
3
80%-84% 3RM
Glute ham raise
3
8
Add weight if possible
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based off back squat 1RM.
cLoad based off power snatch 1RM.
1619

Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Abdominal exercisea
3
20
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based off back squat 1RM.
cLoad based off power snatch 1RM.
Mesocycle 7
October 16-October 29
Focus: Strength/power 3
Microcycle 25 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 25
Mon/Fri
Hang power clean
3
5
70-%74% 5RM
Back squat + box jump
3
5+5
80%-84% 5RM
Bench press + medicine ball chest pass
3
5+5
80%-84% 5RM
Push jerk
3
5
70%-75% 5RM
Lying triceps extension
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power snatch
3
5
70%-75% 5RM
Snatch pull (floor)
3
5
80%-84% 5RM
Lat pulldown
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
Bent-over row
3
8
75%-79% 8RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
Microcycle 26 (1 week)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Week 26
Mon/Fri
Hang power clean
4
3
75%-79% 3RM
Back squat + box jump
4
3+3
85%-89% 3RM
Bench press + medicine ball chest pass
4
3+3
80%-84% 3RM
Push jerk
4
3
80%-84% 3RM
Lying triceps extension
3
8
80%-84% 3RM
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
1620

Microcycle 25 (1 week)
Note: Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monday’s.
Wed
Hang power snatch
4
3
75%-79% 3RM
Snatch pull (floor)
4
3
85%-89% 3RM
Lat pulldown
3
8
80%-84% 8RM
Bent-over row
3
8
80%-84% 8RM
Glute ham raise
3
10
Add weight if possible
Abdominal exercise*
3
20
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 7
October 30-November 5
Focus: Post preseason testing (before in-season)
Microcycle 27 (1 Week)
2RM power exercise
Power clean
Hang power snatch
Push jerk
Push press
2RM for nonpower core exercises
Back squat
Front squat
Bench press
Other testing*
Sit and reach
Shoulder elevation
30-15 intermittent fitness test
Line drill
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pull test
Body composition (skinfolds)
*Other exercises to test based on in-season program.
In-Season
Female College Basketball Center
23 weeks: November 6-April 14 (including tournament play)
Mesocycle 8
1621

November 6-December 3
Focus: Strength maintenance
Microcycles 28-31 (4 Weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets Reps
Training loads
Week 28
Week 29
Week 30
Week 31
1
Clean pull (mid-thigh
block)
1
4
75%-79%
1RM
80%-84%
1RM
60%-64%
1RM
85%-89%
1RM
Back squat
1
6
75%-79%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
65%-69%
6RM
90%-94%
6RM
Incline bench press
1
6
75%-79%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
65%-69%
6RM
90%-94%
6RM
Lateral shoulder raise
1
10
70%-74%
10RM
75%-79%
10RM
70%-74%
10RM
80%-84%
10RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
2
Push press
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Quarter front squat
(from pins)
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Closed-grip bench
press
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Seated low pulley row
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 9
December 4-December 31
Focus: Strength and power development
Microcycles 32-35 (4 Weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets Reps
Training loads
Week 32
Week 33
Week 34
Week 35
1
Hang power clean
1
3
65%-69%
1RM
70%-74%
1RM
60%-64%
1RM
80%-84%
1RM
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
1622

Microcycles 32-35 (4 Weeks)
Front squat
1
5
70%-74%
5RM
80% 5RM
60%-64%
5RM
80%-84%
5RM
Standing shoulder
press
1
5
70%-74%
5RM
80% 5RM
60%-64%
5RM
80%-84%
5RM
Lying triceps
extension
1
10
70%-74%
10RM
80% 10RM
65%-69%
10RM
80%-84%
10RM
Abdominal
exercise*
Max in 60 s
2
Push jerk
1
3
60%-64%
1RM
65%-69%
1RM
60% 1RM
70%-74%
1RM
Step-up
1
5
65%-69%
5RM
70%-74%
5RM
60% 5RM
75%-79%
5RM
Closed-grip bench
press
1
10
60%-64%
10RM
65%-69%
10RM
60% 10RM
70%-74%
10RM
Lat pulldown
1
10
60%-64%
10RM
65%-69%
10RM
60% 10RM
70%-74%
10RM
Abdominal
exercise*
Max in 60 s
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 10
January 1-January 28
Focus: Strength and power development
Microcycles 36-39 (4 Weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets Reps
Training loads
Week 36
Week 37
Week 38
Week 39
1
Power clean
1
2
80%-84%
1RM
85%-89%
1RM
90%-94%
1RM
70%-74%
1RM
Back squat
1
4
80%-84%
4RM
85%-89%
4RM
90%-94%
4RM
65%-69%
4RM
Bench press
1
4
80%-84%
4RM
85%-89%
4RM
90%-94%
4RM
65%-69%
4RM
Barbell biceps curl
1
8
80%-84%
8RM
85%-89%
8RM
90%-94%
8RM
65%-69%
8RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
1623

Microcycles 36-39 (4 Weeks)
2
Hang power snatch
1
3
70%-74%
1RM
75%-78%
1RM
80%-84%
1RM
60%-64%
1RM
Forward step lunge
1
4
70%-74%
4RM
75%-78%
4RM
80%-84%
4RM
60%-64%
4RM
Closed-grip bench
press
1
8
70%-74%
8RM
75%-78%
8RM
80%-84%
8RM
60%-64%
8RM
Upright row
1
8
70%-74%
8RM
75%-78%
8RM
80%-84%
8RM
60%-64%
8RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 11
January 29-February 15
Focus: Strength and power development
Microcycles 40-43 (4 Weeks)
Session
Exercises
Sets Reps
Training loads
Week 40
Week 41
Week 42
Week 43
1
Snatch grip mid-thigh
pull (block)
1
6
75%-79%
1RM
80%-84%
1RM
60%-64%
1RM
85%-89%
1RM
Back squat
1
6
80%-84%
6RM
85%-89%
6RM
65%-69%
6RM
90%-94%
6RM
Bench press
1
6
80%-84%
6RM
85%-89%
6RM
65%-69%
6RM
90%-94%
6RM
Lateral shoulder raise
1
10
75%-79%
10RM
80%-84%
10RM
70%-74%
10RM
85%-89%
10RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
2
Push press
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Quarter back squat
(from pins)
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Closed-grip bench
press
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Seated low pulley row
1
6
70%-74%
6RM
75%-79%
6RM
60%-64%
6RM
80%-84%
6RM
Abdominal exercise*
Max in 60 s
*Abdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
1624

Mesocycle 12
February 16-March 17
Focus: Power and strength optimization
Microcycles 44-46 (3 Weeks—SEC Tournament)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Training loads
Week 44
Week 45
Week 46
1
Hang power clean
1
3
70%-74% 1RM
75%-79% 1RM
80%-84% 1RM
Front squat
1
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Push press
1
5
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
85%-89% 5RM
Lying triceps extension
1
10
75%-79% 10RM
80%-84% 10RM
85%-89% 10RM
Abdominal exercisea
Max in 60 s
2
Push jerk
1
3
65%-69% 1RM
70%-74% 1RM
75%-79% 1RM
Jump squatb
1
5
70%-74% 5RM
75%-79% 5RM
80%-84% 5RM
Closed-grip bench press
1
10
65%-69% 10RM
70%-74% 10RM
75%-79% 10RM
Lat pulldown
1
10
65%-69% 10RM
70%-74% 10RM
75%-79% 10RM
Abdominal exercisea
Max in 60 s
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensity based off of 1RM squat.
Mesocycle 13
March 18-April 7
Focus: Power and peaking performance
Microcycles 47-49 (3 Weeks—national tournament)
Session
Exercises
Sets
Reps
Training loads
Week 47
Week 48
Week 49
1
Jump squatb
1
3
40%-44% 1RM
35%-39% 1RM
30%-34% 1RM
Quarter back squat
1
3
80%-84% 3RM
75%-79% 3RM
70%-74% 3RM
Push jerk
1
3
80%-84% 3RM
75%-79% 3RM
70%-74% 3RM
Lying triceps extension
1
8
80%-84% 8RM
75%-79% 8RM
70%-74% 8RM
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensity based off 1RM bench press.
1625

Microcycles 47-49 (3 Weeks—national tournament)
Abdominal exercisea
Max in 60 s
2
Jump shrug
1
3
70%-74% 3RM
65%-69% 3RM
60%-64% 1RM
Clean pull (thigh block)
1
3
80%-84% 3RM
75%-79% 5RM
70%-74% 3RM
Bench throwb
1
4
40%-44% 1RM
35%-39% 1RM
30%-34% 1RM
Lat pulldown
1
10
70%-74% 8RM
65%-69% 8RM
60%-64% 8RM
Abdominal exercisea
Max in 60 s
aAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensity based off 1RM bench press.
Mesocycle 13
April 8-April 14
Focus: Postseason testing (after in-season)
Microcycle 50 (1 Week)
2RM power exercise
Power clean
Hang power snatch
Push jerk
Push press
2RM for nonpower core exercises
Back squat
Front squat
Bench press
Other testing*
Sit and reach
Shoulder elevation
30-15 Intermittent Fitness Test
Line drill
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pull test
Body composition (skinfolds)
*Other exercises to test based on in-season program.
Tournament Option A (Two Games)
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Practice (or rest)
Practice
Practice
Practice
Game
Practice
Game
Resistance training
Resistance training
1626

Tournament Option B (Two Games)
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Practice (or
rest)
Game
Practice
Practice
Practice
Practice Game
Resistance
training
Plyometric
training
Resistance
training
Tournament Option C (Three Games Back-to-Back)
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Practice (or
rest)
Practice
Practice
Practice
Practice
Game
Game
Resistance
training
Plyometric
training
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Game
Rest
Practice
Practice
Practice
Practice
Rest
Resistance
training
Resistance
training
Plyometric
training
Comments
Each mesocycle is considered a block of training and contains two or three individual microcycles;
unloading mesocycles are strategically placed to occur before the next mesocycle during the off-season
and preseason and are at key microcycles during the in-season.
This program incorporates variations in volume-load, training intensity, and targeted training exercises.
Repetition maximum loads are not used, as training to failure has been shown to reduce power output
and increase the risk of overtraining. Therefore, percentage ranges based off of RM loads are used to
deal with the accumulated fatigue associated with in-season training and competitions.
It is important to note that these are the target sets and that 3 to 5 warm-up sets should be performed
to provide an appropriate specific warm-up for the targeted loadings.
Refer to table 18.8 (page 544) for the relationship between the %RM and the number of repetitions
allowed and table 18.9 (page 547) for the estimation of a 1RM.
Refer to table 18.15 (page 561) for rest period length assignment based on repetition goal.
KEY TERMS
active rest
annual training plan
basic strength phase
competitive period
daily undulating periodization
emphasis training models
first transition period
fitness–fatigue paradigm
1627

general adaptation syndrome (GAS)
general preparatory phase
hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase
linear periodization
macrocycle
maintenance
mesocycle
microcycle
nonlinear periodization
parallel training models
peaking
periodization
preparatory period
recovery
restoration
second transition period
sequential training models
specific preparatory phase
stimulus–fatigue–recovery–adaptation theory
strength/power phase
supercompensation
traditional periodization
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The duration of what phase of Selye’s general adaptation syndrome will be
lengthened if an athlete is under large amounts of psychoemotional stress?
  a.  alarm
  b.  resistance
  c.  supercompensation
  d.  exhaustion
  2.  The early stages of a long-term athlete development plan best aligns with
which model of periodization?
  a.  parallel
  b.  sequential
  c.  emphasis
  d.  traditional
  3.  What can last between two and six weeks, with the most common duration
used by strength and conditioning professionals being four weeks?
  a.  microcycle
1628

  b.  macrocycle
  c.  mesocycle
  d.  maxicycle
  4.  A preparatory period corresponds to what other part of the season?
  a.  postseason
  b.  in-season
  c.  preseason
  d.  off-season
  5.  A hypertrophy phase of training best aligns with which phase?
  a.  general preparatory
  b.  specific preparatory
  c.  precompetitive
  d.  main competitive
1629
