CHAPTER 23
REHABILITATION,
RECONDITIONING, AND
MEDICAL ISSUES
Morey J. Kolber, PhD, PT, and William J. Hanney,
DPT, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of David H. Potach
and Terry L. Grindstaff to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identify the members of the allied health team and their
responsibilities during the rehabilitation and reconditioning of
injured athletes;
recognize the types of injuries and medical conditions that
athletes sustain;
comprehend the timing and events of tissue healing;
understand the goals of each tissue healing phase; and
describe the role of the strength and conditioning professional
during injury rehabilitation and reconditioning.
As the employment of strength and conditioning professionals
continues to increase, their role will expand to allow more active
1630

participation in the rehabilitation and reconditioning of injured
athletes. The strength and conditioning professional has unique
knowledge and insight regarding optimal athletic function and can
serve a vital role during the final stages of an advanced
rehabilitation program by preparing the athlete for a return to
competition. These abilities give the strength and conditioning
professional distinct responsibilities during rehabilitation from athletic
injury. To fully understand how the strength and conditioning
professional can best augment the rehabilitation of injured athletes,
one must first recognize the role of each member of the allied health
team. Furthermore, an understanding of different types of injury and
the physiological healing process is essential to hastening the
recovery from injury.
This chapter is not intended to provide the reader with
rehabilitation protocols for specific injuries. Rather, the aim is to
explain the physiological events that follow a musculoskeletal injury,
thereby allowing optimal goal setting by the strength and
conditioning professional to improve rehabilitation outcomes. The
information in this chapter should ultimately be used to return an
injured athlete to maximal function. The rehabilitation and
reconditioning approach follows five basic principles, listed in the
sidebar.
1631

Allied Health Team
The allied health team provides health care services, with athlete
needs and concerns as the primary focus (15). All members of the
allied health team are responsible for educating coaches and
athletes regarding injury risks, precautions, and treatments; they
must also prevent injuries and rehabilitate those athletes who have
sustained injury. Several different professionals play important roles
in assisting the injured athlete’s return to the playing field,
necessitating effective communication.
Principles of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
Healing tissues must not be overstressed.
The athlete must fulfill specific criteria to progress from one phase to another
during the rehabilitative process.
The rehabilitation program must be based on current clinical and scientific
research.
The program must be adaptable to each individual and his or her specific
requirements and goals.
Rehabilitation is a team-oriented process requiring all the members of the
allied health team to work together toward a common goal of returning the
athlete to unrestricted competition as quickly and safely as possible.
Allied Health Team Members
The team physician provides medical care to an organization,
school, or team. The team physician is most often a medical doctor
(MD) or doctor of osteopathy (DO). The team physician may have
specialized training (residency or fellowship) in a variety of fields,
including family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, and
orthopedics (67) but should be proficient in the care of
musculoskeletal injuries and sport-related medical conditions (32).
Specific responsibilities of the team physician may include
1632

preparticipation examinations, on-field emergency care, injury and
illness evaluation and diagnosis, and referral to other health care
professionals as needed (67). Although not responsible for daily
rehabilitation, the team physician most often makes the final
determination of an athlete’s readiness for return to competition (31,
67). Another important role of the team physician is the prescription
of medications as needed, including anti-inflammatory, pain, and
cold and flu medications.
The person typically responsible for the day-to-day physical health
of the athlete is the athletic trainer or athletic therapist. In the
United States, an athletic trainer is certified by the National Athletic
Trainers’ Association Board of Certification as a Certified Athletic
Trainer (ATC). The athletic trainer works under the supervision of the
team physician and is employed primarily by secondary schools,
colleges, or professional teams but may also work in an outpatient
physical therapy clinic. Primary responsibilities of this individual
include management and rehabilitation of injuries resulting from
physical activity and prevention of injuries through the prescription
of sport-specific exercise and the application of prophylactic
equipment (e.g., tape and braces). Specifically, the athletic trainer
evaluates injuries, provides the injured athlete with therapeutic
exercise to hasten the rehabilitation process, treats injuries with
therapeutic modalities, and serves as an administrator for the allied
health team (15). Because the athletic trainer has a significant
amount of contact with the athlete, he or she plays a key role in
promoting communication between members of the allied health
team, the coach, and the athlete (15).
A physical therapist (or physiotherapist) with specialization
in orthopedics or sport physical therapy can play a valuable role in
reducing pain and restoring function to the injured athlete. Although
physical therapists are typically based in outpatient physical therapy
clinics, many collegiate and professional teams now directly employ
physical therapists as members of the allied health staff. A physical
therapist may help develop specific treatment strategies or manage
1633

long-term rehabilitation. In the United States, physical therapists
with expertise in sport injury management or orthopedics may
become board certified through the American Board of Physical
Therapy Specialties (ABPTS) and obtain the Sports Certified
Specialist (SCS) or Orthopedic Certified Specialist (OCS) credentials,
respectively. These board-certified specialists are more commonly
becoming 
participants 
in 
the 
evaluation, 
treatment, 
and
rehabilitation of acutely injured athletes and often serve in the dual
capacity of team athletic trainer and physical therapist.
The strength and conditioning professional typically focuses
on strength, power, and performance enhancement. The strength
and conditioning professional also plays a valuable role within the
allied health team and is an integral part of the rehabilitation and
reconditioning process. Ideally, this person should be certified by the
National Strength and Conditioning Association as a Certified
Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) to ensure that he or she
has the knowledge and background to contribute to the
rehabilitation process. In consultation with the athletic trainer or
physical therapist, this professional uses an understanding of the
proper technique and application of several types of exercise (e.g.,
resistance, plyometric, and aerobic exercise) to develop a
reconditioning program to ready the injured athlete for return to
competition. Furthermore, strength and conditioning professionals
possess an extensive understanding of the role that biomechanics
play in a wide variety of sports and activities, which may allow them
to suggest exercises for advanced rehabilitation and reconditioning
of many injuries.
Additionally, the allied health team often includes specialized
members who assist with the postacute rehabilitation and
reconditioning of injured athletes. An exercise physiologist has a
formal background in the exercise sciences and uses his or her
expertise to assist with the design of a conditioning program that
carefully considers the body’s metabolic response to exercise and the
ways in which that reaction aids the healing process. Because proper
1634

nutrition is crucial in recovery from injury, a nutritionist or a
registered dietitian with a background in sport nutrition may provide
guidelines regarding proper food choices to optimize tissue recovery.
Ideally, the nutritionist has been formally trained in food and
nutrition sciences and may be a registered dietitian (RD) recognized
by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Commission on Dietetic
Registration (15). A licensed counselor, psychologist, or
psychiatrist with a background in sport may provide strategies that
help the injured athlete better cope with the mental stress
accompanying an injury.
Communication
Communication between members of the allied health team is
essential (15, 97). Most often the injured athlete has the most
contact with coaches, the athletic trainer, and the strength and
conditioning professional. In some instances, athletes disclose the
initial onset of an injury to a sport coach or strength and
conditioning professional before consulting with the athletic trainer.
Thus consistent communication between these individuals is
imperative. This does not negate communication with other
members of the allied health team (physician, physical therapist,
nutritionist, sport psychologist) who may not have as frequent
interactions over the course of a week. A weekly meeting of the
allied health team can provide a forum so all members are able to
discuss the training requirements and necessary restrictions for each
injured athlete. Relevant questions for discussion could include the
following: What is the current status of the athlete (no participation,
limited participation, full participation)? What exercises or activities is
the 
athlete 
currently 
performing? 
Are 
any 
restrictions 
or
modifications necessary? How is the athlete progressing? Do any
program changes need to be made?
To develop training programs most effectively for an injured
athlete, the strength and conditioning professional must understand
the diagnosis of the given injury and exercise indications and
1635

contraindications. An indication is a form of treatment required by
the rehabilitating athlete. For example, a softball outfielder with
shoulder impingement must maintain lower extremity function, so
the athletic trainer may request that the athlete continue to perform
lower extremity strength, speed, agility, and power exercises during
shoulder rehabilitation. Therefore, lower body exercise is indicated.
A contraindication is an activity or practice that is inadvisable or
prohibited due to the given injury. For example, during the later
phases of rehabilitation from an anterior shoulder dislocation, an
American football player may require upper body strengthening
before being cleared to play. The athletic trainer requests that the
athlete initiate upper body strengthening, but the bench press
exercise may be contraindicated because it can place the injured
shoulder in a vulnerable position in the presence of anterior
instability. To clarify the role of the strength and conditioning
professional during this process, it may be beneficial to have the
allied health team use a form that specifies the indications and
contraindications for exercises, providing for safe and efficient
conditioning (figure 23.1). Additionally, the strength and conditioning
professional can use a similar form (figure 23.2) to communicate the
components of a given program and the athlete’s subjective and
objective responses to those components.
The allied health team includes a large number of
professionals working together to provide an optimal
rehabilitation and reconditioning environment. Thus, the
relationship of the allied health team members requires
thoughtful communication to ensure a safe, harmonious
climate for the injured athlete.
1636

Types of Injury
Macrotrauma is a specific, sudden episode of overload injury to a
given tissue, resulting in disrupted tissue integrity. Trauma to the
bone can lead to either a contusion or a fracture. Skeletal fractures
can result from a direct blow to a bone and can be given a variety of
classifications (e.g., closed, open, avulsed, incomplete). Joint trauma
is manifested as either a dislocation (complete displacement of the
joint surfaces) or a subluxation (partial displacement of the joint
surfaces) and may result in joint laxity or instability. Ligamentous
trauma is termed a sprain and is assigned a classification of first
degree (partial tear of the ligament without increased joint
instability), second degree (partial tear with minor joint instability),
or third degree (complete tear with full joint instability).
Rehabilitation Referral
Date: January 2, 2026
Name: Allison Pierson                     Sport and position: Volleyball setter
Injury date: November 21, 2025     Surgery date: December 4, 2025
Diagnosis: Left ACL reconstruction
Indications
Stationary bicycle: Progress gradually up to 60 minutes. No running at this time.
Single-leg hip sled: Less than 90 degrees of left knee flexion; begin without
resistance; progress only after consultation with athletic training staff.
Upper extremity resistance exercises
Contraindications
Leg extension exercise
Full squats
Plyometrics
Running
Jonah Grey, ATC    January 2, 2026
FIGURE 23.1 A sample rehabilitation referral form, which communicates indications and
contraindications to allied health team members.
1637

Musculotendinous trauma is classified as either a contusion (if
the trauma was direct) or a strain (if the trauma was indirect). A
muscle contusion is an area of excess accumulation of blood and
fluid in the tissues surrounding the injured muscle; it may severely
limit the function of the injured muscle. Muscle strains are tears of
muscle fibers and are further assigned grades, or degrees. A first-
degree strain is a partial tear of individual fibers and is characterized
by strong but painful muscle activity. A second-degree strain is a
partial tear with weak, painful muscle activity. A third-degree muscle
strain is a complete tear of the fibers and is manifested by very
weak, painless muscle activity. A tendon, like a muscle, can also
rupture if the tensile load applied to it exceeds its limit. Typically,
tendon collagen fibers are significantly stronger than the muscle
fibers to which they attach, so failure is more likely to occur within
the muscle belly, at the musculotendinous junction, or at the tendon
attachment to the bone than within the substance of the tendon.
Microtrauma, or overuse injury, results from repeated, abnormal
stress applied to a tissue by continuous training or training with too
little recovery time. Overuse injuries may be due to training errors
(e.g., poor program design and excessive volume), suboptimal
training surfaces (e.g., too hard or uneven), faulty biomechanics or
technique during performance, insufficient motor control, decreased
flexibility, or skeletal malalignment and predisposition (86, 97). Two
common overuse injuries involve bone and tendon. The most
common overuse injury to bone is a stress fracture. Although body
type and structure, nutrition, and metabolic factors play a large role,
stress fractures are often the result of a rapid increase in training
volume or excessive training volume on hard training surfaces (4,
97). Tendinitis is inflammation of a tendon (83), and if the cause of
the inflammation is left uncorrected, chronic tendinitis or
tendinopathy may develop. (A term with the suffix -itis refers to an
inflammatory 
condition 
[e.g., 
tendinitis 
and 
arthritis].)
Tendinopathy is a degenerative condition characterized by minimal
1638

inflammation, 
tendon 
cell 
damage 
or 
death, 
and
neovascularization (83).
Strength and Conditioning Summary
Date: October 23, 2025
Name: Molly Jackson
Sport: Soccer
Position: Midfield
Diagnosis: Grade II right MCL sprain
Injury date: October 9, 2025
Activity Summary
Number of sessions: 7
Date begun: October 16, 2025
Current Activities
Activity
Sets
Reps
Resistance (lb)
Half squat
3
10
115
Leg extension
3
10
60
Leg flexion
3
10
50
Heel raise
3
15
95
Time
Speed
Stationary bicycle
20 min
80 rpm
Stair stepper
20 min
70 ft per min
Jogging
10 min
5.0 mph
Assessment
No difficulty with half squats; may increase squat depth to three-quarters.
Suggestions
Increase squat depth; increase jogging speed and time.
Jill Michaels, CSCS    October 23, 2025
FIGURE 23.2 A sample strength and conditioning summary form, which records the
athlete’s current activities and responses to those activities.
1639

Tissue Healing
The process of returning to competition following injury involves the
healing of the injured tissues and the preparation of these tissues for
the return to function. To better understand the role of the strength
and 
conditioning 
professional 
during 
rehabilitation 
and
reconditioning, it is necessary to review the general phases of tissue
healing following musculoskeletal injury (34, 36). The timing of the
events occurring within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and local factors,
including age, lifestyle, degree of injury, comorbidities, and the
structure that has been damaged. Moreover, the phases of healing
progress along a continuum with no definitive timelines. However, all
tissues follow the same basic pattern of healing (table 23.1).
TABLE 23.1 Tissue Healing
Inflammatory response phase
Pain, swelling, and redness
Decreased collagen synthesis
Increased number of inflammatory cells
Fibroblastic repair phase
Collagen fiber production
Decreased collagen fiber organization
Decreased number of inflammatory cells
Maturation–remodeling phase
Proper collagen fiber alignment
Increased tissue strength
The process of returning to competition following injury
involves healing of the injured tissues, preparation of
these tissues for the return to function, and use of
proper techniques to maximize rehabilitation and
reconditioning.
1640

Inflammatory Response Phase
Inflammation is the initial reaction to injury (34, 36) and is
necessary for normal tissue healing to occur. Both local and systemic
inflammation occur during the inflammatory response phase,
allowing the eventual healing and replacement of damaged tissue.
During the inflammatory phase, several events transpire that
contribute to both tissue healing and an initial decrease in function.
The injured area becomes red and swollen due to changes in
vascularity, blood flow, and capillary permeability. After tissues are
damaged, a locally hypoxic environment leads to a certain amount of
tissue death that allows the release of several chemical mediators,
including histamine and bradykinin. These substances further
increase blood flow and capillary permeability in this local area,
thereby promoting edema and fluid accumulation into the
surrounding tissues. Edema elevates intraarticular pressure, which
inhibits the motor neurons required for muscle activation (22, 84).
Thus, edema can lead to muscle weakness and atrophy as well as
limited function (22, 59). Tissue debris and pathogens (i.e.,
infectious agents) are removed from the injured area by increased
blood flow and a process called phagocytosis; phagocytosis involves
macrophages (i.e., a type of white blood cell), which engulf cellular
debris to speed tissue healing. Additionally, fibroblast cells in nearby
tissues are activated and begin to migrate toward the injury site to
assist with healing. At this time, macrophages and platelets within
the injured area release growth factors that assist in the transition
to the fibroblastic repair phase (see next section).
The inflammatory substances present during this phase may
result in stimulation of pain receptors (i.e., nociceptors), causing the
injured athlete to sense pain, further contributing to decreased
function. This phase typically lasts 72 hours following an acute injury
but may last longer with a compromised blood supply and more
severe structural damage. Though the inflammatory phase is critical
to tissue healing, if it does not end within a reasonable amount of
1641

time, the phases that follow may not occur, thereby delaying the
rehabilitation process.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Once the inflammatory phase has subsided, tissue repair begins
(34, 36); the fibroblastic repair phase, also known as the
proliferative 
phase, 
is 
characterized 
by 
catabolism 
(tissue
breakdown) and replacement of tissues that are no longer viable
following injury. In an attempt to improve tissue integrity, new
capillaries and connective tissue (scar tissue) form in the area.
Fibroblasts from the inflammatory phase, with the help of growth
factors, begin to synthesize type III collagen, which is randomly
deposited along the injured structure and serves as the framework
for tissue regeneration. This newly formed tissue is weaker than the
original tissue; thus optimal strength of the new tissue is not yet
achieved. Collagen fibers are strongest when they lie longitudinally
(i.e., parallel) to the primary line of stress, yet many of the new
fibers are positioned transversely, which limits their ability to
efficiently transmit force. This phase of tissue healing begins as early
as 72 hours after injury and may last up to two months.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The maturation–remodeling phase of healing often overlaps with the
fibroblastic reparative phase and may begin as early as a few weeks
after injury. During the maturation–remodeling phase of healing
the weakened tissue produced during the repair phase is
strengthened (34, 36). During this phase, new collagen fibers have
shifted to a stronger type I collagen, allowing the newly formed
tissue the opportunity to improve its structure, strength, and
function. With increased loading, the collagen fibers of the newly
formed scar tissue (a collection of cells and collagen that have
repaired damaged tissue) begin to hypertrophy and align themselves
along the lines of stress (29). The thicker and more optimally aligned
collagen fibers become stronger, allowing a return to function.
1642

Although strength of the collagen fibers and healing tissue improves,
this tissue is not as strong as the normal healthy tissue it has
replaced. Tissue remodeling in the maturation–remodeling phase
can last months to years after injury (34, 36, 54).
Following injury, all damaged tissues go through the
same general phases of healing: inflammation, repair,
and remodeling. The timing of the events occurring
within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and
local factors, including age, lifestyle, degree of injury,
comorbidities, 
and 
the 
structure 
that 
has 
been
damaged. Characteristic events define each phase and
separate one phase from another.
1643

Goals of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
The strength and conditioning professional must consider both the
athlete’s subjective response to injury and the physiological
mechanisms of tissue healing; both are essential in relation to an
athlete’s return to optimal performance. The process of returning to
competition following injury involves healing of the injured tissues,
preparation of these tissues for the return to function, and use of
proper techniques to maximize rehabilitation and reconditioning.
While the goal is often a rapid resumption of activity, it is important
to remember that each athlete responds differently to injury and
thus progresses uniquely during rehabilitation.
As a preface to discussion of the goals of treatment during injury
rehabilitation, two points must be made. First, healing tissue must
not be overstressed (70). During tissue healing, controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimize collagen matrix formation
(8, 29), but too much stress can damage new structures and
significantly slow the athlete’s return to competition. This means
choosing a level of loading that provides neither too much stress nor
too little stress to the athlete’s healing tissue. It should be obvious
that when one is choosing the load, it is necessary to consider the
phase of healing and athlete type. For example, an exercise that
provides too little tissue loading during the maturation–remodeling
phase may provide too much loading (increased tissue stress) during
the inflammatory response phase. Further, an exercise that provides
too little stress to a professional basketball center may be excessive
for an amateur cross country runner. The plane of movement is
another necessary consideration. As an example, the medial
collateral ligament of the knee is subject to the greatest stress when
loaded in the frontal plane (i.e., valgus stress) during terminal knee
extension. Therefore, if the athlete has a medial collateral ligament
injury, frontal plane movements (valgus stress) such as a lateral box
1644

jump or a side (lateral) shuffle should be avoided during early
healing phases. However, those frontal plane movements should
probably be included in some form during the later phases.
Second, the athlete must meet specific objectives to progress
from one phase of healing to the next (98, 99). These objectives
may depend on range of motion, strength, or activity. It is the
responsibility of the team physician, athletic trainer, physical
therapist, or a combination of these professionals to establish these
guidelines.
Healing tissue must not be overstressed, but controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimize collagen
matrix formation. The athlete must meet specific
objectives to progress from one phase of healing to the
next.
Inflammatory Response Phase
The first response to an injury is inflammation, a reaction that is
essential for subsequent healing but also important to manage
properly so as to not retard the rehabilitation process.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal for treatment during the inflammatory response
phase is to prevent disruption of new tissue. A healthy environment
for new tissue regeneration and formation is essential for preventing
prolonged inflammation and disruption of new blood vessel and
collagen production, which can prolong the injury. Relative rest from
strenuous activity and physical agents (e.g., modalities) including
ice, compression, elevation, and electrical stimulation are often
primary treatment options to minimize tissue damage and decrease
acute pain, but results on efficacy have been mixed (63, 93). One
important consideration is that evidence has shifted from the
Protection Rest Ice Compression Elevation (PRICE) approach to the
Protection Optimal Loading Compression Ice Elevation (POLICE)
1645

approach for the management of injuries in the inflammatory stage
of healing as a result of improved outcome measures and faster
recovery (5, 20).
It is also important to realize that a quick return to function relies
on the health of other body tissues. Therefore, the power, strength,
and endurance of the musculoskeletal tissues and the function of the
cardiorespiratory system must be maintained. The strength and
conditioning professional can provide significant knowledge and
expertise in this area. To accomplish these tasks, the strength and
conditioning professional should consult with the athletic trainer to
determine which types of exercises are indicated and contraindicated
for the specific injury. Maximal protection of the injured structures is
the primary goal during this phase. Assuming that this requirement
is fulfilled, exercises may include general aerobic and anaerobic
training and resistance training of the uninjured extremities. If
movement of the injured limb is not contraindicated, isolated
exercises that target areas proximal and distal to the injured area
may also be permissible provided that they do not stress the injured
area. Examples include hip abduction and external rotation exercises
following a knee injury (24, 39, 65) or scapula-stabilizing exercises
following a shoulder injury (57, 94, 100).
To Ice or Not to Ice
Ice applications, also referred to as cryotherapy, have been used for centuries to
decrease pain and inflammation following an injury (51). Advancements in
cryotherapy methods from ice packs or ice massage and cold-water immersion to
more advanced devices such as continuous cooling systems, vapor and gaseous
sprays, and total body cooling have emerged, providing numerous application
options. As part of the POLICE method for the management of acute injuries, early
pain-free movement and ice are emphasized (5, 20). However, the use of ice has
been questioned in both the strength and conditioning and allied health
professions due to the potential for delaying natural post-injury healing processes
and impeding muscle performance (52). These concerns, largely unsupported in
the literature, stem from the potential of ice to cause a vasoconstriction of blood
vessels (45), which may limit the ability of healing agents to reach the site of
injury. While this concern is reasonable, there is no evidence that icing alone
1646

following an injury may impede healing in human subjects. Contradictory evidence
exists to determine if reductions in muscle performance occur following
cryotherapy (31, 41).
Evidence pertaining to cryotherapy after injury has supported a pain-relieving
analgesic effect via reduced nerve conduction velocity, with additional benefits that
include a suppression of the inflammatory response with the potential to reduce
swelling and enhanced return to sport (6, 31, 35, 37, 51, 96). Following exercise,
evidence supports the use of cryotherapy to reduce symptoms of delayed onset
muscle soreness (DOMS); however, systemic reductions in insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) and protein synthesis may occur, impairing recovery (23, 73, 96).
Thus, cryotherapy is recommended in the acute inflammatory stage as part of the
POLICE strategy (20). A 15-minute duration is adequate when ice packs, ice
massage, and cold-water immersion are used (31). Cold-water immersion (<59 °F
[<15 °C]) is a more efficient option when a larger coverage area is needed (e.g.,
whole hand or ankle) and is likely to have a greater effect on cooling deeper tissue
(31). Local cryotherapy applications beyond the acute inflammatory phase are not
warranted. Although cryotherapy may reduce DOMS and be effective when rapid
recovery is needed, routine use is not recommended because it may impair protein
synthesis (23).
Exercise Strategies
Although a rapid return to competition is often a goal, protective
loading, also known as active rest, of the injured area is initially
necessary to safeguard the damaged tissue from additional injury.
Therefore, painful or intense exercise directly involving or stressing
the injured area is not recommended during this phase. Exercises
that do not directly involve or stress the injured area (e.g., upper
extremity exercises for lower extremity injury, single-leg exercises
with the uninvolved limb) and pain-free active movement of the
involved area of injury may still be performed.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
After the inflammatory response phase, the body begins to repair
the damaged tissue with similar new tissue; however, the resiliency
of this new tissue is low at this time. Repair of the weakened injury
site can take up to eight weeks if the proper amount of restorative
stress is applied, or longer if too much or too little stress is applied.
1647

Treatment Goal
The treatment goal during the fibroblastic repair phase is to prevent
excessive muscle atrophy and joint deterioration of the injured area.
In addition, a precarious balance must be maintained in which
disruption of the newly formed collagen fibers is avoided but low-
load stresses are gradually introduced to allow increased collagen
synthesis and prevent loss of joint motion. To protect the new,
relatively weak collagen fibers in the early reparative phase, the
athlete should avoid active resistive exercise involving the damaged
tissue and may opt for submaximal activities such as functional
movements against gravity or isometric resistance. Too little activity,
though, can also have a deleterious effect, because newly formed
fibers will not optimally align and may form adhesions (abnormal
collection of cells and collagen that lack pliability), thereby
preventing full motion. Early protected motion hastens the optimal
alignment of collagen fibers and promotes improved tissue mobility.
As in the inflammatory phase, therapeutic modalities are permissible,
but their goal during repair is to promote collagen synthesis and
manage pain. Ultrasound, electrical stimulation, and ice are
continued in order to support and hasten new tissue formation (40,
82). Again, maintenance of muscular and cardiorespiratory function
remains essential for the uninjured areas of the body. The strength
and conditioning professional has considerable expertise to offer the
other members of the allied health team regarding selection of the
appropriate activities. Possible exercise forms during the repair
phase include strengthening of the uninjured extremities and areas
proximal and distal to the injury, aerobic and anaerobic exercise, and
improving strength and neuromuscular control of the involved areas.
Exercise Strategies
The following exercises should be used during the repair phase only
after consultation with the team physician, athletic trainer, or
physical therapist. Isometric exercise may be performed, provided
that it is pain free and otherwise indicated by the physician or
1648

athletic trainer. Submaximal isometric exercise allows the athlete to
maintain neuromuscular function and improve strength with
movements performed at an intensity low enough that the newly
formed collagen fibers are not disrupted. Unfortunately, isometric
strengthening is joint angle specific; that is, strength gains occur
only at the angles used (46). Therefore, if indicated, it may be
appropriate for the athlete to perform isometric exercises at multiple
angles (46). Isokinetic exercise uses equipment that provides
resistance to movement at a given speed (e.g., 60°/s or 120°/s).
Because sport is not performed at a single consistent speed,
isokinetic exercise may be limited in real-world application as a
standalone exercise. Furthermore, most isokinetic equipment allows
single-joint exercise only, which permits concentration on a specific
muscle or joint but is not always the most functional method of
strengthening. While isokinetic machines may have a more limited
application in terms of strengthening specificity, these devices may
be of value for providing continuous passive motion early in the
post-injury or post-operative phases of healing and can be used to
assess muscle balance or ratios (e.g., quadriceps-to-hamstring
strength ratio).
While isotonic exercise (i.e., concentric and eccentric) involves
movements with constant external resistance, the amount of force
required to move the resistance varies, depending primarily on joint
angle and the length of each agonist muscle. Isotonic exercise uses
several different forms of resistance, including gravity (i.e., exercises
performed without equipment, with gravitational effects as the only
source of resistance), dumbbells, barbells, and weight stack
machines. Concentric and eccentric muscle actions can be used to
increase strength and appropriately stress healing tissues. Eccentric
exercise allows for greater force production and requires less energy
expenditure compared to concentric exercise and has been shown to
promote 
healing 
or 
tissue 
repair 
via 
the 
concept 
of
mechanotransduction (44, 61). Mechanotransduction occurs
when tissues are subject to overload, which communicates a
1649

mechanical message from the extracellular to intracellular region of
the tissue. This mechanical message upregulates the cellular DNA,
which in turn stimulates collagen synthesis (44). Loads may be
increased to provide greater challenge as tissue healing progresses.
The speed at which the movement occurs is controlled by the
athlete; movement speed can be a program design variable, with
more acute injuries calling for slower movement and the later
phases of healing better suited to faster, more sport-specific
movement.
Neuromuscular control is the ability of muscles to respond to
sensory feedback to maintain joint stability (85). This sensory
information is referred to as proprioception and occurs in response
to receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, ligaments, and the joint
capsule. 
Proprioception 
contributes 
to 
the 
conscious 
and
unconscious efferent control of posture, balance, stability, and sense
of position (85). For example, when running on an uneven surface,
cross country runners rely on sensory input (proprioception) from
their lower extremities to adjust to the ground to prevent falls and
injuries. After an injury, neuromuscular control is usually impaired
due to arthrogenic inhibition, which occurs from swelling within
the joint that causes a reflex inhibition of the alpha motor neuron
responsible for muscle activation (22). Specific types of exercises
exist to improve neuromuscular control following injury and can be
manipulated through alterations in surface stability, vision, and
speed. Mini-trampolines, balance boards, and stability balls can be
used to create unstable surfaces for upper and lower extremity
training. Athletes can perform common activities such as squats and
push-ups on uneven surfaces to improve neuromuscular control.
Exercises may also be performed with eyes closed, thus removing
visual input, to further challenge balance. Finally, increasing the
speed at which exercises are performed provides additional
challenges to the system. Specifically controlling these variables
within a controlled environment that is sport or activity specific will
1650

allow the athlete to progress to more challenging exercises in the
next stage of healing.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The outcome of the repair phase is the replacement of damaged
tissue with collagen fibers. After those fibers are laid down, the body
can begin to remodel and strengthen the new tissue, allowing the
athlete to gradually return to full activity.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal during the maturation–remodeling phase is to
optimize tissue function while transitioning to return to play or
activity. Athletes improve function by continuing and progressing the
exercises performed during the repair phase and by adding more
advanced, sport-specific exercises that allow progressive stresses to
be applied to the injured tissue. The athlete can be tempted to do
too much too soon, which may further damage the injured tissues. It
is important to remember that, while there may be less pain with
activity at this point, the injured tissues have not fully healed and
require further attention to achieve complete recovery (figure 23.3).
Progressive tissue loading allows improved collagen fiber alignment
and fiber hypertrophy (8, 30). Return-to-play or activity decisions
should be based on an understanding of normal tissue healing time
frames as well as a criteria-based progression with predetermined
objectives. These objectives usually include measures of range of
motion and strength, functional testing, and patient-reported
function using established patient-reported outcome forms (1, 57,
100). It is important for the allied health team members to
communicate, have clearly defined roles, and use return-to-play
metrics to ensure a safe return to play.
1651

FIGURE 23.3 Profile of a typical soft-tissue injury response. Pain is often used as a guide
for tissue health. Pain levels (blue line) often decrease well before tissue healing (yellow
line) is complete, which may lead athletes to inappropriately believe adequate tissue
healing has occurred (vertical yellow line) and it is safe to resume full activity.
Exercise Strategies
Ultimately, as with other aspects of strength and conditioning,
rehabilitation and reconditioning exercises must be functional and
must mimic activity demands—that is, reflect specificity. Examples of
functionally 
specific 
training 
include 
joint 
angle–specific
strengthening, velocity-specific muscle activity, closed kinetic chain
exercises, and exercises designed to further enhance neuromuscular
control. Strengthening should transition from general exercises to
sport-specific exercises designed to replicate movements common in
given sports. For example, for a basketball guard who sprained an
ankle, rehabilitation exercises may progress from a general single-
joint exercise to those more specific to the sport and position (figure
23.4). Specificity of movement speed is another important program
design 
variable. 
Strengthening 
exercises 
performed 
during
rehabilitation should also mimic sport speed requirements; that is,
activities that require greater speeds (e.g., sprinting) should include
exercises performed at higher velocities. Using the example in figure
23.4, the exercises progress from the relatively slow and controlled
balance and strength exercises to the faster plyometric and sprinting
1652

exercises. Similarly, consider a sprinter with a hamstring muscle
strain. Whereas initial reconditioning may concentrate on the
recovery of flexibility and strength of the injured muscles, the nature
of this athlete’s sport necessitates exercises performed at rapid
speeds during the later phases of rehabilitation and reconditioning.
Exercise selection for a sprinter with an improving hamstring muscle
strain might progress from hamstring flexibility to eccentric strength
to concentric strength to dynamic stretching and finally to rapid
isotonic strengthening. Examples of velocity-specific exercise include
manually resisted strengthening and plyometric and speed training.
Refer to chapters 19 and 20 for a thorough discussion of plyometric
and speed training, respectively.
1653

FIGURE 23.4 Sample progression for a basketball player with a goal of returning from an
ankle sprain. Exercises progress from general to basketball specific.
The kinetic chain is the collective effort or involvement of two or
more sequential joints to create movement (88). A closed kinetic
chain exercise is one in which the terminal joint meets with
considerable resistance that prohibits or restrains its free motion
(88); that is, the distal joint segment is stationary (e.g., fixed to the
1654

ground). Lower extremity closed kinetic chain exercises have often
been classified as a more functional form of exercise than open
kinetic chain exercises (2, 94) because most sport-related activities
are performed with the feet “fixed” to the playing surface. For
example, during the closed kinetic chain squat exercise, the feet are
“fixed” to the floor and essentially do not move, providing a base on
which movement occurs (figure 23.5a). Closed kinetic chain
exercises have several advantages, including increased joint stability
and functional movement patterns; during sport activity, joints are
not typically used in isolation but rather work in concert with the
adjacent joints and surrounding musculature. Although closed kinetic
chain exercises are commonly viewed as lower extremity exercises,
closed chain upper extremity exercises exist as well (figure 23.5b)
(57, 100).
1655

FIGURE 23.5 Closed kinetic chain exercises: (a) squat exercise and (b) push-up exercise.
An open kinetic chain exercise uses a combination of
successively arranged joints in which the terminal joint is free to
move; open kinetic chain exercises allow for greater concentration
on an isolated joint or muscle (2). An example is the leg (knee)
extension exercise, during which the feet and lower legs are allowed
to move freely (figure 23.6). The leg extension allows greater
concentration on the quadriceps at the knee joint; in comparison,
the squat, which also uses the quadriceps muscles and knee joint,
relies on muscle activity on the hip and ankle joints as well. Although
closed kinetic chain exercises are often viewed as more functional,
1656

most activities involve both closed and open kinetic chain
movements. In sprinting, for example, while one lower extremity is
on the ground (closed kinetic chain), the other is in the air (open
kinetic chain), which means that both types of movement can occur
simultaneously. In some situations, an open chain exercise may
therefore be an equally appropriate choice. Some examples of upper
extremity open kinetic chain activities include the biceps curl and
bench press exercises.
FIGURE 23.6 Example of an open kinetic chain exercise—leg (knee) extension exercise.
Exercises designed to improve neuromuscular control, which were
introduced during the repair phase, should be continued and
progressed as appropriate during the maturation–remodeling phase.
Rehabilitation 
and 
reconditioning 
goals 
and 
strategies 
are
summarized in the sidebar.
1657

Rehabilitation and Reconditioning Goals
and Strategies
Although rehabilitation and reconditioning programs must be individualized, the
following are lists of general goals and approaches for each phase.
Inflammatory Response Phase
Prevention of new tissue disruption and prolonged inflammation with the use
of relative rest and passive modalities
Maintenance 
of 
function 
of 
the 
cardiorespiratory 
and 
surrounding
neuromusculoskeletal systems
No active exercise for the injured area
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Prevention of excessive muscle atrophy and joint deterioration of the injured
area
Maintenance of function of the neuromusculoskeletal and cardiorespiratory
systems
Possible exercise options: submaximal isometric, isokinetic, and isotonic
exercise; balance and proprioceptive training activities
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
Optimization of tissue function
Progressive loading of the neuromusculoskeletal and cardiorespiratory
systems as indicated
Possible exercise options: joint angle–specific strengthening, velocity-specific
muscle activity, closed and open kinetic chain exercises, proprioceptive
training activities
1658

Program Design
The area in which strength and conditioning professionals can best
contribute to the rehabilitation and reconditioning process is the
provision of resistance and aerobic training programs designed for
the injured athlete. Their experience in prescribing exercise for
uninjured athletes gives strength and conditioning professionals the
ability to properly adapt training programs for those recovering from
injury. Although protocols do exist for exercise prescription following
injury, many do not incorporate sport-specific program design
variables; the same principles used to design resistance and aerobic
training programs for uninjured athletes should be applied during
rehabilitation and reconditioning.
Resistance Training
Several programs have been developed to assist with the design of
resistance training programs (16, 21, 47, 89, 104), and many of
these programs have been advocated for use in the rehabilitation
setting (16, 47, 104). Both the DeLorme (16) and Oxford (104)
programs use 3 sets of 10 repetitions with a pyramid-type design.
DeLorme’s program progresses from light to heavy resistance. The
initial set involves 10 repetitions of 50% of the athlete’s 10-repetition
maximum (10RM), the second set increases the resistance to 75% of
the 10RM, and the final set requires 100% of the 10RM (16, 17).
The Oxford system (104) is the reverse of DeLorme’s system; that is,
it progresses from heavy to light resistance. The first set performed
is 100% of the athlete’s 10RM, the second is 75% of the 10RM, and
the third is 50% of the 10RM (104). Unlike the DeLorme system,
which has a built-in warm-up from progressive increases in
resistance, the Oxford system begins with heavy resistance. Thus, a
non-fatiguing warm-up set should be considered.
Knight’s (47) daily adjustable progressive resistive exercise
(DAPRE) system requires and allows more manipulation of intensity
and volume than either the DeLorme or the Oxford system (16, 17,
1659

104); DAPRE involves 4 sets, with repetitions ranging from 10 to
possibly only 1 during the final set. The first set requires 10
repetitions of 50% of the estimated 6RM, and the second set
requires 6 repetitions of 75% of the estimated 6RM. The third set in
the DAPRE requires the maximum number of repetitions of 100% of
the estimated 6RM; the number of repetitions performed during the
third set determines the adjustment made in resistance for the
fourth set (table 23.2) (48). The DeLorme, Oxford, and Knight
systems are protocols that have been shown to increase muscle
strength (17, 48, 104) and may be appropriate when one is
designing rehabilitation resistance training programs. However,
athletes require rehabilitation and reconditioning programs tailored
to the demands of their respective sports. Although these protocols
(17, 48, 104) are established strengthening programs, they may be
too strict to allow individualization for athletes in different sports.
TABLE 23.2 Resistance Adjustments for Daily
Adjustable Progressive Resistance Exercise (DAPRE)
Protocol
Number of repetitions
performed during set 3
Adjusted resistance for
set 4
Resistance for next
exercise session
0-2
Subtract 5-10 lb (2.3-4.5
kg)
and repeat the set
—
3-4
Same resistance or
subtract 5 lb (2.3 kg)
Same resistance
5-7
Same resistance
Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4.5 kg)
8-12
Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4.5 kg)
Add 5-15 lb (2.3-6.8 kg)
13+
Add 10-15 lb (4.5-6.8 kg)
Add 10-20 lb (4.5-9.1 kg)
Adapted by permission from K. L. Knight, “Knee Rehabilitation by the Daily Adjustable
Progressive Resistive Exercise Technique,” American Journal of Sports Medicine 7, no. 6
(1979): 336-337, Copyright © 1979. Reprinted by Permission of Sage Publications.
1660

Programs for both the healthy and the damaged tissues of an
injured athlete require the same basic design principles provided in
chapter 18. According to the specific adaptation to imposed
demands (SAID) principle, the system will adapt to the demands
placed on it. Therefore, the goal of training (specific adaptation)
should dictate the design of the resistance training program
(imposed demands). For example, during the remodeling phase of
an injured marathoner’s patellofemoral rehabilitation, his or her
quadriceps muscles should be trained with an emphasis on muscular
endurance. Therefore, the athlete should perform many repetitions
of the rehabilitation exercises to prepare the muscles for the
demands of long-distance running. Conversely, a weightlifting
athlete rehabilitating from the same injury requires fewer repetitions
of high-intensity rehabilitation and reconditioning exercises during
the later portions of the remodeling phase to prepare the muscles
for the power demands of this sport. Refer to table 23.3 for a
comparative example of the rehabilitation strategies for these two
athletes.
Aerobic and Anaerobic Training
Although research has yet to determine an optimal aerobic training
program for use in the rehabilitation setting, it is generally accepted
that the program should mimic specific sport and metabolic demands
as closely as possible. The strength and conditioning professional,
having a background in designing and implementing conditioning
exercises for healthy athletes, is the ideal member of the allied
health team to prescribe and supervise the aerobic training portion
of the injured athlete’s reconditioning program. As with the
resistance 
training 
program, 
the 
strength 
and 
conditioning
professional must consider the demands that the given sport places
on the injured athlete. Keeping these demands and the
contraindications of the injury in mind, the strength and conditioning
professional can use the prescription guidelines in chapters 17 and
1661

20 to create an appropriate training program to allow an
uncomplicated return to competition.
TABLE 23.3 Application of Design Principles for
Resistance Training Programs During Rehabilitation
and Reconditioning From Patellofemoral Injury
Phase of
healing
Design
variable
Athlete
Marathon runner
Weightlifter
Inflammatory
response
phase
Goals and
exercises
None that require
quadriceps activity—relative
rest of this area needed to
reduce inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and endurance of
adjacent areas (i.e., hip
extensors, knee flexors, and
plantar flexors)
Maintenance of
cardiovascular fitness
None that require
quadriceps activity—
relative rest of this area
needed to reduce
inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and power of
adjacent areas (i.e., hip
extensors, knee flexors,
and plantar flexors)
Maintenance of upper
body muscular strength
and power
Fibroblastic
repair phase
Goals and
exercises
Isometric quadriceps
strengthening at full knee
extension (progressing to
multiple angles)
Progress to pain-free
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (following
consultation with sport
medicine team)
Continue exercise of
adjacent areas
Continue aerobic exercise;
may begin stationary
bicycle or stair stepper (per
recommendation of sports
medicine team)
Isometric quadriceps
strengthening at full
knee extension
(progressing to multiple
angles)
Progress to pain-free
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (following
consultation with sport
medicine team)
Continue exercise of
adjacent areas
Continue upper body
muscular strength and
power exercises
Sets ×
repetitions
2-3 × 15-20
3-4 × 8-10
1662

Intensity
Submaximal (≤50% 1RM)
Submaximal (≤50% 1RM)
Maturation–
remodeling
phase
Goals and
exercises
Begin more sport-specific
activities, movements, and
speeds
Return to running, gradually
increasing distance and
speed as tolerated
Add lunge and squat
(increase knee range of
motion as able)
Begin more sport-
specific activities,
movements, and speeds
Increase movement
speeds to those similar
to competition
Add Romanian deadlift
and squat (increase
knee range of motion as
able)
Sets ×
repetitions
2-3 × 15-20
4-5 × 3-8
Intensity
Progress to maximal intensity
(50%-75% 1RM)
Progress to maximal
intensity (>75% 1RM)
Again consider rehabilitation from a patellofemoral injury for a
marathon runner, a wrestler, and a weightlifter; the metabolic energy
demands of their rehabilitation and reconditioning are markedly
different. For the marathon runner’s goals, aerobic fitness is of much
greater concern and must be addressed immediately. The metabolic
demands for the wrestler involve a combination of aerobic and
anaerobic systems; therefore, interval training is more appropriate
(27). In contrast, the weightlifter’s program would focus on
maintaining anaerobic fitness. Selecting the appropriate training
device depends on the region of the body that is injured. While
specificity of training is important, gains in exercise capacity can be
made through exercise of other body regions (i.e., upper extremity
exercise to improve oxygen consumption) (92). A variety of options
exist to modify aerobic and anaerobic training, including the upper
body ergometer, deep-water running, lower extremity cycling, and
elliptical machines. Strategies to maintain cardiovascular fitness can
be implemented early, even during the inflammatory response
phase. As already emphasized, it is important to remember that to
allow optimal healing, attempts should be made to initially minimize
stress to healing tissues, but relevant stresses can be applied to
1663

uninjured areas. An example would be for a soccer player with an
acute right knee injury. Although options for right lower extremity
strengthening may be initially limited, exercises may still be
performed for the upper extremity as well as the uninvolved left
lower extremity (e.g., single-leg squat with weights). The strength
and conditioning professional may need to modify uninvolved left
lower extremity exercises to ensure that the involved right lower
extremity is protected. Exercises targeting the uninvolved limb can
improve muscle strength in the involved limb (55, 56). Thus it is
important for injured athletes to continue to perform strength and
conditioning exercises for the uninvolved body regions.
Designing strength and conditioning programs for
injured athletes requires the strength and conditioning
professional 
to 
examine 
the 
rehabilitation 
and
reconditioning goals to determine what type of program
will allow the quickest return to competition.
1664

Reducing Risk of Injury and Reinjury
In addition to using strength training and conditioning strategies
when rehabilitating athletes from injuries, strength and conditioning
professionals can implement research findings to reduce both risk for
initial injury and risk of reinjury following injury (77, 90). Structured
programs have been developed for the lower (25, 28, 33, 76) and
upper extremities (57, 101). These programs are often sport specific
and address common risk factors for injury.
Previous injury is one of the most substantial risk factors for
future injury in active individuals (30, 75, 86, 91). Risk factors for
upper extremity injury include decreased glenohumeral range of
motion, scapular dyskinesis (i.e., abnormal scapular movement), and
decreased shoulder strength (9, 13, 101). Among overhead athletes,
shoulder internal rotation range of motion restrictions have been
shown to increase the risk for shoulder injury, whereas shoulder
external rotation and flexion range of motion restrictions are
associated with elbow injuries (7, 11, 42). Range of motion exercises
and the Throwers Ten are often used as a structured program to
reduce upper extremity injury risk (102). The Throwers Ten program
includes a specific set of upper extremity exercises and movements
designed to improve muscle performance as required for throwing
activities (26). Additional exercises shown to reduce the risk of upper
extremity injury among athletes include strengthening the shoulder
external rotators (figures 23.7a, b) and stretching the shoulder to
improve internal rotation (figures 23.8a, b) (14, 49, 64, 66, 78). Risk
factors for lower extremity injury include decreased balance,
decreased neuromuscular control during jump landing, and
decreased lower extremity muscle strength (3, 53, 103). Structured
lower extremity programs to reduce injury risk should be sport
specific and should focus on neuromuscular control during activities
such as landing from a jump and cutting. Two exercises that may be
used to reduce this risk of injury to the lower extremities are proper
jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise (figure
1665

23.9a) and a single-leg squat to emphasize unilateral strength
(figure 23.9b, c).
Previous injury is one of the most substantial risk
factors for future injury in active individuals. Lower
extremity programs designed to reduce injury risk
should be specific to a sport’s demands and should focus
on the neuromuscular control required during specific
activities such as landing from a jump and cutting.
While upper extremity injury risk-reduction programs exist (102),
much of the research has focused on the prevention of lower
extremity injuries, specifically anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
injuries. Two examples of structured programs designed to reduce
injury risk are Sportsmetrics (33) and PEP (Prevent Injury and
Enhance Performance) (62). While using slightly different foci, each
of these programs introduces exercises and movements shown to
address risk factors for injury and reduce lower extremity injury
rates, especially ACL injuries and ankle sprains (25, 28, 33, 76). In
addition, using eccentric exercise has been shown to dramatically
reduce the risk of hamstring injury (74, 79).
After return to sport, individuals may continue to demonstrate
deficits in strength, biomechanics, and functional performance (71,
87). Deficits may often be compared to the contralateral limb (60) or
established normative values (19, 38). Side-to-side differences of
less than 10% in strength and functional performance may be
considered acceptable (60). The transition between supervised
rehabilitation for an injury and unrestricted activity participation is a
critical time when members of the allied health team need to be in
communication regarding how deficits in strength and performance
will be managed.
1666

FIGURE 23.7 Shoulder external rotator strengthening may be used to reduce shoulder
injuries and improve shoulder function and stability: (a) start position and (b) end position.
FIGURE 23.8 The sleeper stretch is used to reduce shoulder injuries, improve shoulder
internal rotation, and reduce posterior shoulder tightness; (a) front view and (b) top view.
1667

Medical Conditions
Strength and conditioning professionals must have an understanding
of medical conditions that may develop from training as well as
preexisting conditions that may increase the risk of an adverse event
from exercise. Possessing this knowledge is essential for ensuring
safe participation in exercise and appropriate discontinuation
procedures. Recognizing the early presentation and management
strategies for rhabdomyolysis, sickling from the sickle cell trait, and
temperature-induced illnesses are a necessary requirement for
training both the athletic and general populations.
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyolysis is characterized by the breakdown of skeletal
muscle tissue, leading to the release of myoglobin into the
bloodstream. Myoglobin can pose a risk to kidney function,
potentially causing kidney damage or failure if left untreated. Various
factors can trigger rhabdomyolysis, including trauma, extreme
physical exertion, and muscle compression. The severity of
rhabdomyolysis ranges from mild muscle discomfort to severe, life-
threatening complications (43). Symptoms of rhabdomyolysis may
manifest as severe muscle pain and weakness, dark urine (often
resembling 
cola, 
properly 
termed 
myoglobinuria), 
swelling,
tenderness of affected muscles, alongside fatigue, nausea, vomiting,
and confusion. In severe instances, individuals may experience
dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, and acute kidney injury (43).
If rhabdomyolysis is suspected, immediately discontinue activity,
lie the client down, implement proper hydration protocols, and
closely monitor to ensure stability while awaiting further medical
assistance (10). Prompt referral to a medical professional is
necessary to prevent more serious medical complications (10).
1668

FIGURE 23.9 Two exercises that may be used to reduce risk of injury to the lower
extremities are (a) proper jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise and (b,
c) a single-leg squat to emphasize unilateral strength.
1669

Prevention of rhabdomyolysis is best achieved by proper exercise
prescription. Avoidance of excessive or unaccustomed exercise
intensity, volume, and duration as well as consideration of baseline
fitness levels before engaging in new exercise serves as a key
preventative measure.
Sickle Cell Trait
The sickle cell trait (SCT) is an inherited condition characterized by
one abnormal hemoglobin gene and one normal hemoglobin gene.
Individuals with SCT may experience complications akin to sickle cell
disease under specific circumstances like extreme physical exertion
or low oxygen levels (72). Unlike sickle cell disease, which
necessitates inheriting two abnormal genes, SCT carriers usually do
not exhibit severe symptoms. In situations such as high-altitude
training environments or extreme exertion where oxygen levels are
low, the red blood cells can change to an abnormal shape (sickling)
and begin to clump together, which ultimately may be responsible
for constriction of the blood vessels. When sickling and the
associated vascular occlusion occurs, reports of fatigue or tiredness,
pain, swelling of hand and feet, and vision problems may occur (69).
Longer term consequences of sickling include damage to the blood
vessels; a shorter life span of existing red blood cells, leading to
anemia; and, in cases of vascular occlusion, stroke. Evidence
suggests that the SCT is associated with sudden death during
periods of extreme exertion and is more common among young
African Americans (69). A majority of deaths attributed to the SCT
have occurred during military training and athletic participation at
the collegiate level (69).
Should an individual develop symptoms of sickling, they should
immediately discontinue physical activity and be removed from
extreme temperature environments. Owing to potential dehydration,
proper hydration protocols should be implemented immediately (95).
Immediate referral to a medical professional is indicated if acute
symptoms are present.
1670

Key prevention strategies for SCT involve awareness of triggers
for sickling, education, preventive measures, and regular medical
follow-up. Testing for SCT is recommended among athletes and
those engaged in intense training because SCT has been associated
with sudden death in individuals during extreme exertion. Intense
physical activity should be approached with caution, especially in
extreme conditions or high altitudes, to reduce the potential for
sickling (81). For individuals with the SCT who engage in exercise
training, 
proper 
climate 
acclimatization, 
training 
intensity
considerations to stay at or below the anaerobic threshold, and an
active cool-down to promote lactate clearance will serve as a
reasonable preventative strategy (68, 80).
Heat Cramps
Heat cramps are part of a continuum of heat-related injuries or
illnesses marked by dysregulation of the body’s thermoregulation
capacity (58). Heat cramps are muscle spasms or involuntary
sustained contractions of large muscle groups that may occur when
the athlete is exposed to elevated environmental temperatures
during exercise. Heat cramps may occur during or shortly after
exercise. Several factors may contribute to heat cramps, including
dehydration, depleted electrolytes, increased training load or
duration, and muscular fatigue. Although heat cramps generally
occur in hot environments, elevated core body temperature is not
always present.
When heat cramps are suspected, immediate cessation of activity
and moving the athlete to a cooler environment to lower body
temperature is a necessity. Implementing proper rehydration is
essential as are appropriate cooling measures. Passive gentle
stretching or massage to affected muscle groups may be beneficial
(58). Heat cramps may be prevented by proper hydration protocols,
use of light-weight clothing when exercising in hot environments,
and appropriate progressive conditioning in the specific training
environment to allow heat acclimation (58).
1671

Heat Syncope
Heat syncope occurs when an athlete experiences dizziness or
lightheadedness and faints during or immediately after training (12).
Heat syncope may occur during positional changes or with prolonged
positioning during exercise in hot environments. Risk factors for heat
syncope include training in hot environments without prior heat
acclimation, dehydration, pooling of blood in the venous system, and
low blood pressure (58). When syncope is suspected or fainting
occurs it is important to lay the athlete in a supine position and
elevate the legs above the level of the heart. If fainting has
occurred, monitoring of vital signs and shielding of the body from
direct heat exposure is recommended. Once appropriate, proper oral
rehydration is necessary. Prevention strategies include proper
acclimation to training in hot environments and ensuring proper
hydration before, during, and after training. If low blood pressure or
frequent syncope occurs despite preventative efforts, medical
consultation is necessary.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is the inability to effectively exercise in the heat.
Numerous factors contribute to heat exhaustion including low blood
pressure, dehydration, lack of acclimation to exercise in hot
environments, heavy sweating, and electrolyte depletion (12, 58).
Symptoms of heat exhaustion include inability to continue exercise,
pallor, heat cramps, weakness, syncope, dizziness, headache,
hyperventilation, nausea, diarrhea, acute loss of appetite, decreased
or dark urine output, and elevated core temperature up to 104.9 °F
(40.5 °C) (12, 58).
If heat exhaustion is recognized, immediately remove the athlete
from the hot environment and, once appropriate, restore oral
rehydration. If oral rehydration is not possible due to nausea,
parenteral (non-oral method such as intravenous) rehydration may
be considered (58).
1672

Aggressive cooling measures should be implemented such as
forced air conduction or spraying of lukewarm water to cool the body
(58). In cases where these measures are not effective, total body
cooling in an ice bath may be indicated (12). It is important to
immediately respond to symptoms of heat exhaustion to avoid
progression to heatstroke.
Prevention strategies include proper acclimation to training in hot
environments and ensuring proper hydration before, during, and
after training.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke, a progression of heat exhaustion, is considered a
medical emergency (12, 58). Heatstroke occurs from intense or long-
term 
exercise 
and 
is 
characterized 
by 
body 
temperature
dysregulation greater than heat exhaustion. Signs and symptoms of
heatstroke include rapid heart rate, hypotension, sweating with
possible evaporation of sweat by time of incident, hyperventilation,
altered mental state, diarrhea, seizure, and coma (12, 58).
Immediate recognition of heatstroke is vital to preventing lethal
consequences; core body temperatures in excess of 109.4 °F (43 °C)
have been associated with death. Immediate total body cooling
measures must be implemented such as total body immersion in ice.
Monitoring of core body temperature is paramount to appropriately
responding to heatstroke. Contacting emergency medical services is
indicated in cases where medical staffing is not present.
Prevention strategies include proper acclimation to training in hot
environments and ensuring proper hydration before, during, and
after training. A key element of prevention resides in recognizing
that heat illness exists on a continuum of events all related to
dysregulation of the body’s thermoregulatory capacity. As such,
heatstroke is likely to be preceded by heat cramps, syncope, and
heat exhaustion. Recognizing the presentation of heat cramps or
heat exhaustion before heatstroke is paramount to prevention.
1673

Cold Exposure
Cold exposure, or hypothermia, occurs when the body’s
temperature drops below 95 °F (35 °C), causing the physiological
systems to reduce functions and eventually shut down (18, 50).
While mild hypothermia is manageable, more severe forms are a
medical emergency. Hypothermia affects all organ systems, and
early symptoms include shivering; pale, dry skin; and increased
muscle tone (18). Increased heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration may also be present as the body attempts to promote
thermogenesis (18). Risk factors for hypothermia include exercising
in cold temperatures without adequate warming methods as well as
exposure to rain or cold water that results in wet clothing, which
may promote further heat loss.
Upon recognizing symptoms of cold exposure, immediate
measures for warming the body are required through environmental
temperature and use of clothing. Monitoring body temperature is a
necessity once hypothermia is recognized; core temperature less
than 89.6 °F (32 °C) may lead to cardiovascular failure (18).
It is important to recognize that although the body can
acclimate to training in hot conditions, there is little to
no acclimation to training in cold environments.
Prevention strategies include recognizing extremes in
temperature exposure and use of protective clothing to
help create a warming effect while training.
1674

Conclusion
Effective athletic injury rehabilitation and reconditioning require
efficient communication between the members of the allied health
team. Each member plays a distinct role in ensuring the injured
athlete’s return to function; although the job of each professional is
different, the tasks of each team member complement those of the
others on the team. Goals are established for each athlete, and
therapeutic exercise programs must be designed, administered, and
progressed according to the tissue healing sequence. The program
must be individualized to effectively return the athlete to normal
function and competitive athletics. Early rehabilitation for initial
tissue protection and strengthening is more structured than later
rehabilitation phases; the latter allows for progression to functional
activities that are specific to the athlete’s sport and position.
Designing reconditioning programs for injured athletes necessitates
a careful examination of the sport requirements and a thorough
understanding of both the healing process and therapeutic exercise.
KEY TERMS
allied health
arthrogenic inhibition
athletic trainer
closed kinetic chain
contraindication
contusion
counselor
cryotherapy
daily adjustable progressive resistive exercise (DAPRE)
dislocation
edema
exercise physiologist
fibroblastic repair
1675

growth factors
heat cramps
heat exhaustion
heatstroke
heat syncope
hypothermia
indication
inflammation
inflammatory response
macrotrauma
maturation–remodeling
mechanotransduction
microtrauma
neovascularization
neuromuscular control
nutritionist
open kinetic chain
physical agent
physical therapist
physiotherapist
proprioception
psychiatrist
psychologist
remodeling
repair
rhabdomyolysis
sickle cell disease
sickle cell trait (SCT)
sprain
strain
strength and conditioning professional
subluxation
team physician
tendinitis
1676

tendinopathy
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Following an acute ankle sprain, which of the following
measures should be immediately implemented to enable
prompt recovery?
  a.  POLICE
  b.  PRICE
  c.  avoidance of ice
  d.  avoidance of ankle movement
  2.  Which 
of 
the 
following 
management 
strategies 
is
recommended when heatstroke occurs?
  a.  passive stretching of large muscle groups
  b.  total body ice bath immersion
  c.  supine positioning with the legs elevated above the heart
  d.  direct exposure to forced air conduction
  3.  Following injury, which of the following healing factors are
responsible for releasing growth factors?
  a.  fibroblasts
  b.  platelets
  c.  histamine
  d.  bradykinin
  4.  Which of the following conditions presents with myalgia,
weakness, and myoglobinuria?
  a.  sickle cell trait
  b.  heat cramps
  c.  rhabdomyolysis
  d.  tendinopathy
  5.  Which of the following strategies has been associated with
enhancing collagen synthesis and preventing hamstring
strains?
  a.  concentric focused power activities
  b.  isometric performance at a submaximal level
1677

  c.  passive stretching
  d.  eccentric focused overload
1678
