CHAPTER 24
OVERREACHING,
OVERTRAINING, AND
RECOVERY
Andrew C. Fry, PhD, and Bradley C. Nindl, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
define and differentiate overtraining and overreaching;
understand the difference between the process of overtraining
and the result of the overtraining syndrome;
recognize contributing factors to overtraining and overreaching;
understand the role of allostatic loading;
realize that not all decreases in performance are due to
overtraining;
know the physical performances most sensitive to overtraining
and overreaching;
appreciate the physiological, biomechanical, and psychological
responses and adaptations to overtraining and overreaching;
learn about potential strategies for avoiding performance
decrements due to overtraining; and
understand how functional overreaching can be a beneficial
part of an appropriately designed training program.
1679

Training for optimum performance is familiar territory for athletes, as
it is for most people. Attaining one’s performance potential often
requires advanced training methods that include phases (i.e., cycles
or blocks) of high training volumes and intensities (see chapter 22).
While these training phases can be effective for long-term
performance enhancement, they also run the risk of creating a
training stimulus that is greater than the recovery capabilities of the
individual. When this happens, it is called overtraining (OT), and it
contributes to the resulting overtraining syndrome (OTS). The
problem of overtraining was recognized as far back as 1866 (101),
but the topic of overtraining has received much attention in the
scientific literature in recent years, and it is readily apparent that this
is a complex and often confusing phenomenon (13, 38, 40, 43, 61,
65, 72, 74, 80, 88, 89, 104, 107, 135, 137, 139). Furthermore, the
issue of overtraining is a problem in areas other than sport, such as
with tactical (i.e., military) personnel (134). A common finding in
many reviews and position stands is that more research must be
performed to understand more fully what overtraining and
overreaching (OR) is, how it affects the individual, and what
measures can be taken to avoid this problem. In the present chapter
we will examine the known causes and results of the various stress
responses as they apply primarily to strength and conditioning
programs for high performance and will provide possible strategies
to avoid or remedy overtraining syndrome.
1680

Periodization and the General
Adaptation Syndrome
When the total training program is correctly designed and
implemented, the individual can adapt and improve. This can closely
align with Selye’s general adaptation syndrome (GAS; figure
24.1) (117). In the GAS paradigm as applied to any biological
system, a stress creates an initial alarm phase, followed by a
resistance phase, and ultimately adaptation. If the stress is too
great, the system is unable to successfully resist the stressor and the
biological system dies. In the context of an athlete and a well-
designed strength and conditioning program, this sequence initially
produces decreases in performance, followed by performance
recovery, and eventually performance improvements. This assumes
that the training program permits the athlete to resist the stress;
otherwise, persistent decreases in performance occur. These
performance decrements can be either long term due to
overtraining, or short term due to overreaching (see the
Overreaching Defined section later in the chapter) (93, 108, 125,
126). Therein lies the problem for the strength and conditioning
professional: how to create the proper overload (i.e., training stress)
and how to correctly adjust the training load to permit the athlete to
recover and attain enhanced performance. When done correctly, this
process can be part of a well-designed periodized program (see
chapter 22). It must be remembered that both the GAS and the
concept of periodization are paradigms, or models, and do not
necessarily have to look exactly like illustrations such as figure 24.1.
Indeed, the validity of the GAS as applied to training (14),
periodization paradigms (130), and the concept that fatigue can
accumulate from resistance exercise programs (63) have been
questioned by some academics. However, the vast majority of those
who study overtraining and work in the strength and conditioning
profession recognize the complexity of this topic (25). It also must
1681

be acknowledged that our understanding of overtraining and
overreaching is far from complete (88, 89, 135) and requires much
more study. The goal of this chapter is to help the practitioner and
athlete avoid unintended long-term decreases in performance, which
are exactly the opposite of the intended training goal.
FIGURE 24.1 Relationship between the general adaptation syndrome paradigm and
stages of overtraining and overreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 180.
One of the biggest challenges when training an individual or a
team is how to get the most from training. If working with athletes
training for maximum performance, this means implementing a
training program that will optimize performance for their sport. If
working in a tactical environment (e.g., military, law enforcement,
fire fighter, first responder), the goal again is to optimize
performance for the tasks to be performed. Even for those in the
general population who are hoping to optimize their health and
fitness, it is sometimes desirable to get the maximum effects from
the training program to satisfy their needs. In each of these
scenarios, the person designing the training program will most likely
not be satisfied with mediocre results but is rather seeking to obtain
1682

the best results possible despite potential limitations encountered.
These limitations can include a number of factors such as those
listed in figure 24.2.
Figure 24.2  Possible limiting factors when
designing an optimal strength and conditioning
program.
Time available
Equipment and facilities available
Sport-specific training
Sport governing body regulations
Prior training history
Travel and time zones
Competition density
Injury and physical limitations
Menstrual cycle
Age
Job
Family demands and schedule
Recreational activities
In an effort to maximize the training effect, it may be necessary
to include blocks of training that highly tax the individual in an
attempt to attain the greatest training response possible. Examples
of this can include the high-volume general preparation phases
found in many strength and conditioning programs (see chapter 18
for more details). When implemented correctly, the resulting longer-
term training effect can be quite substantial. But a problem arises
when these phases of training have too high a volume or intensity
and are beyond the recovery capacity of the individual or team,
which can give way to overtraining. But what exactly is overtraining?
What are the lesser forms of overtraining, referred to as
overreaching? And how do these differ from a stressful but well-
designed training block? Although the term overtraining is commonly
1683

used in the sport coaching and strength and conditioning
professions, we must first define exactly what we are talking about.
1684

Overtraining and Overreaching
A number of definitions of overtraining and overreaching can be
found in the literature; however, in many cases the definitions are
vague or extremely general. Some may think the concept of
overtraining is a relatively new topic. However, as previously
mentioned, though not in the context of sport performance, the
issue was recognized as early as 1866 concerning general physical
effort. It was stated that “the exertion shall not exceed the powers
of recruitment; and … the recruitment shall be facilitated by
adequate diet and rest” (101). Additionally, much of the overtraining
literature is based on the seminal work of Hans Selye’s GAS (117),
which is also discussed in chapter 22. In the 1980s and 1990s, sport
scientists and sports medicine clinicians began to recognize the
problems of overtraining in sport and began to study and evaluate
this challenge as described in several reviews (13, 38, 72, 74, 80,
104, 126, 129, 139). The following things had become clear:
Not all forms of overtraining are identical (72, 129).
Not all types of performance decrements are the same (33,
34, 80, 104).
The contributing factors are variable (13, 38, 72, 80, 104, 126,
129, 139).
Figure 24.3 illustrates the training continuum from no training to
optimum training, which can include stressful training to various
overtraining scenarios. What should be abundantly clear in this
figure is that different sports (i.e., training goals) present different
types of overtraining. Likewise, different types of resistance exercise
also present different pathways to the problem of overtraining and
the resulting OTS. It must be remembered that when proper training
programs are followed, the training and performance adaptations
can differ considerably (e.g., a distance runner [aerobic endurance
sport], wrestler [hybrid sport, both aerobic and anaerobic], or a
shot-putter [anaerobic, strength, and power]). Likewise, the factors
1685

contributing to overtraining for these same three athletes, and the
performance impairments and physiological responses, are also
different (13, 33, 34, 38, 72, 80, 104, 126, 138, 139).
Overtraining Defined
Due to the emergence of numerous attempts to define and
understand overtraining (64, 71), a joint task force on the topic was
convened by the combined efforts of the European College of Sports
Science (ECSS) and the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)
(88). The result was their position statement titled “Preventions,
Diagnosis and Treatment of the Overtraining Syndrome” that
presented a consensus definition of overtraining and overreaching,
as well as what was scientifically known about these problems at the
time. This was followed in 2013 by an updated position stand
summarizing what had been learned subsequent to 2006 (89). The
consensus of this working group was to adopt the following
definition of overtraining:
An accumulation of training and/or non-training stress resulting
in long-term decrement in performance capacity with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms 
of 
maladaptation 
in 
which 
restoration 
of
performance capacity may take several weeks or months (88,
p. 2).
1686

FIGURE 24.3 Training continuum resulting in overtraining for numerous forms of exercise
and training. RE = resistance exercise; OT = overtraining; OR = overreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 179.
As can be seen in this definition, this is a serious condition for the
athlete from which recovery can take a long time, and it greatly
interferes or halts the competition training program. Since this
definition was proposed, more recent working groups have added
their definitions to the literature, as well as concerns with the state
of the overtraining research (65, 135) that have helped illustrate the
challenges of understanding this phenomenon.
An important aspect of this definition that was also clarified in
these position stands is that overtraining is actually the process
(e.g., excessively high volumes and intensities of training) that then
can result in an overtraining syndrome (i.e., the collection of
symptoms and performance impairments) (figure 24.4) (88, 89). To
be overtrained, one actually has the OTS and the required long-term
performance impairments (i.e., weeks to months or longer).
Performance impairments are necessary for overtraining to have
occurred. However, we will see that not all performance impairments
are alike.
1687

FIGURE 24.4 Overtraining is the process, and the overtraining syndrome is the result. In
all instances, performance impairment of some type will be one of the results.
Overtraining is the process that can result in an
overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Syndrome Defined
When the ECSS-ACSM Task Force defined overtraining (88, 89), they
specifically stated that the OTS was a combination of “related
physiological 
and 
psychological 
signs 
and 
symptoms 
of
maladaptation,” some of which may not be part of the training
program. As such, the use of the term syndrome indicates the
complex nature of the condition and the fact that the symptoms are
associated with each other.
1688

A major challenge to understanding overtraining and its causes
and effects are the numerous different terms found in the literature.
This is one reason several groups have developed position stands
(88, 89) and consensus statements (65) that include suggested
terminology. Likewise, many symptoms of an overtraining syndrome
can vary between individuals and between different types of training.
However, it is important to note that in all cases, performance is
impaired in some manner. Figure 24.5 lists a number of the terms
used in the literature for overtraining and its effects.
Figure 24.5  Terminology commonly used for
overtraining, the overtraining syndrome, and
related topics.
Overtraining
Overreaching
Functional overreaching
Nonfunctional overreaching
Overtraining syndrome
Stagnation
Overworked
Overstressed
Burnout
Overfatigued
Excessive fatigue
Imbalance of work and recovery
Underrecovered
Failure to adapt
Stressful training syndrome
Unexplained underperformance
Underperformance
Staleness
Maladaptation
Chronic fatigue
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science
and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 178.
1689

Research on the OTS sometimes identifies two types of OTS
related to the autonomic nervous system, specifically the
sympathetic overtraining syndrome (sometimes referred to as
SOTS) and the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome
(sometimes referred to as POTS) (126). First presented by Israel in
1976 (61), these syndromes were named based on how the
autonomic nervous system responded to the training stresses.
Parasympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
Initially named the Addisonoid syndrome since it is often
accompanied by decreased concentrations of the stress hormone
cortisol, this condition is characterized by the predominance of
parasympathetic 
activity. 
In 
general, 
the 
parasympathetic
overtraining syndrome is most often found in aerobic endurance
athletes where very large training volumes are common. Diagnosing
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome in aerobic endurance
athletes can be tricky since decreased resting heart rate (HRrest) is
typically a sign of beneficial cardiovascular adaptations to a training
program (e.g., decreased resting HR). However, in this case, the
decreased HR in already highly trained individuals is due to a
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome and the prerequisite training
program. It should be noted that the parasympathetic overtraining
syndrome does not cause the performance impairments, but rather
is a collection of symptoms typically resulting from the huge training
volumes often used by aerobic endurance athletes. Some of the
classic studies of the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome can be
found in the work of Manfred Lehmann and his research team’s
study of extremely large training volumes of middle-distance runners
(80). Many of the results supported the presence of a
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome (80), and the recovery
period was as long as a year (personal communication, M.
Lehmann). The primary symptom of a parasympathetic overtraining
syndrome, besides decreased performance, is a diminished
sympathetic response (i.e., epinephrine, or adrenaline) to
1690

training (78, 80). At times, this has been called adrenal
exhaustion due to the inability of the adrenal glands to produce
adequate concentrations of epinephrine.
Sympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
For a number of years, the existence of a sympathetic overtraining
syndrome was hypothetical, until it was shown in a group of
resistance exercise overtrained subjects (36). It had been
hypothesized that a sympathetic overtraining syndrome would occur
before development of a parasympathetic overtraining syndrome,
but enhanced sympathetic activity had never been previously shown
in response to an OT stimulus. The primary characteristic of
sympathetic overtraining syndrome is an increased epinephrine
response to exercise and training (36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 139).
Eventually, the elevated catecholamines result in a down-
regulation of their primary receptor in skeletal muscle, β-2
receptors (41, 124). This is believed to be an important part of the
sympathetic overtraining syndrome and the accompanying impaired
contractility of skeletal muscle in this condition.
Overreaching Defined
A lesser form of stressful training than overtraining is called
overreaching (OR) and is defined as follows:
An accumulation of training and/or non-training stress resulting
in short-term decrement in performance capacity with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms 
of 
maladaptation 
in 
which 
restoration 
of
performance capacity may take from several days to several
weeks (88, 89).
This definition is almost the same as overtraining; however, the
severity of the condition is less, and recovery is faster. It must be
appreciated here that there are multiple degrees of performance
impairment, including two types of overreaching (figure 24.6). The
most subtle type is performance stagnation. While sometimes
1691

stagnated performances have been considered a type of overtraining
(13), this is difficult to differentiate from good training programs
since all seriously trained individuals experience periodic plateaus in
performance. However, if stagnation occurs due to an inappropriate
training load (33), adjustments must be made.
FIGURE 24.6 Different types of performance impairment due to an overtraining
syndrome. Being overreached or overtrained results in decreased performance. The primary
differences include the recovery times, whether performance is ultimately enhanced, and
the magnitude of other symptoms that occur.
Functional Overreaching
Many training programs purposely include micro- or mesocycles of
greater training volumes or intensities as part of the long-term plan.
Examples of these include preseason training camps for many sports
that include two or three training sessions a day or general
preparation training blocks in the strength and conditioning program.
When properly prescribed, these can be very effective training
1692

methods that prepare the athlete for later performance gains (88,
89, 106, 126). The short-term effect is decrements in performance,
but recovery can be attained within days or weeks and can result in
a supercompensation effect. As such, and although stressful to the
athlete, functional overreaching (FOR) can be beneficial
provided appropriate recovery is allowed. It should be noted that
functional overreaching is a commonly used training strategy by
many successful coaches. Figure 24.1 on page 778 illustrates how
functional overreaching can fit into the GAS paradigm.
Nonfunctional Overreaching
On the other hand, nonfunctional overreaching (NFOR) is
somewhat similar to functional overreaching with two very important
differences. First, the short-term accumulated fatigue is greater, and,
second, the recovery takes longer (88, 89, 126). In the case of
NFOR, the individual does not experience any supercompensation
and is only able to return to his or her baseline performance levels
(see figure 24.1 on page 778) (88, 89, 93, 108, 125, 126). As the
name implies, this type of training does not serve any useful function
since no performance benefits result, and the athlete has been
unnecessarily stressed.
Overtraining and Overreaching Share
Properties With Other Conditions
A number of other problematic conditions share symptoms and characteristics with
OT and OTS. For example, similarities between OT and the OTS with clinical
depression (4, 5), post-traumatic stress disorder (6), and other relevant
psychological conditions (53) have been noted.
Additionally, many characteristics of relative energy deficiency syndrome
(RED-S), formerly known as the female athlete triad, are similar to symptoms
often found in OTS (122). Although the root causes of each of these illnesses or
diseases may be different from OT and OTS, they can each certainly contribute to
an OTS. Both RED-S and OTS can be interrelated since many causes and
symptoms of each condition contribute to the other. Therefore, when the presence
of RED-S is suspected, it is important to clearly discern how overtraining may be
contributing to this problem. To adequately address the serious condition of RED-S,
1693

trained professionals need to be involved, but the strength and conditioning
professional must be able to recognize when help of this type is needed.
1694

Overtraining Continuum
All the different types and severities of overtraining and overreaching
can collectively make an overtraining continuum (figure 24.7).
Although some overlap may exist between each of the categories,
this continuum illustrates how each successive level becomes more
serious for the athlete and requires longer and more intense
recovery.
FIGURE 
24.7 The 
overreaching/overtraining 
continuum. 
SOTS 
= 
sympathetic
overtraining syndrome; POTS = parasympathetic overtraining syndrome.
It should be apparent now that not all forms of overtraining are
identical (28, 126, 129), and the resulting OTS is not a simple
problem with simple solutions. Indeed, it has been repeatedly
reported that many factors contribute to this problem, and whether
it is due to training for aerobic endurance sports (28, 46) or
resistance exercise (37, 43), it is extremely complex (46, 49, 84, 88,
89, 139) and multidisciplinary (75, 107). The net result is that there
are many risk factors for overtraining (110, 139) that must be
recognized to avoid this problem. As evidenced by some who believe
there is no evidence of fatigue accumulation from resistance exercise
(63), much more research is needed (48, 135). It is highly likely that
understanding this complexity will require novel and emerging
research methods and approaches such as advanced statistical
1695

modeling and work in the field of -omics (e.g., proteomics and
genomics) (4, 30).
1696

Factors Contributing to Overreaching
and Overtraining
The first step in understanding overtraining and overreaching is
identifying the balance between stress and recovery (53). Stress
from a strength and conditioning program must be countered with
adequate recovery to permit long-term progression (figure 24.8).
The inability to adequately recover will undoubtedly result in an
overtraining scenario. Likewise, an inadequate training load will likely
produce suboptimal performance. The challenge for the strength and
conditioning professional is to find the appropriate balance to
maximize the long-term performance adaptations.
FIGURE 24.8 Although many factors can contribute to poor performance, overtraining,
as the name implies, is due to excessive training, inadequate recovery, or both.
Training Factors
Since we are focusing on overtraining and overreaching in the
strength and conditioning context, the first and most obvious
contributing factors are found in the strength and conditioning
program in question. A quick review of the numerous variables in the
resistance exercise program illustrates the many ways the program
can be adjusted to the needs of the individual being trained (139;
see chapter 18). In general, the volume of training (e.g., total
repetitions, 
volume-load, 
mechanical 
work, 
metabolic 
work,
frequency of training) and the intensity of training (e.g., relative
intensity [%RM], absolute intensity [kg], perceptions of effort) are
1697

important variables when determining the training stress (figure
24.9). Excessive amounts of either training volume or intensity can
combine to produce an overtraining stimulus. Monitoring the
characteristics of the training program may be one of the most
important methods for prescribing load. Additionally, the long-term
periodized training program also must be correctly applied. Even
though a periodized program can be effective (see chapter 22), it
can also be incorrectly designed, resulting in overtraining.
Additionally, an appropriately designed training taper can also
enhance performance testing (96). Another training error is a lack of
variation in the training load (126), which can be quantified by
calculating the coefficient of variation (%CV; SD/ x–) for the
training load (29, 82, 139). Finally, the most important part of an
athlete’s training stress is the sport-specific training and practices,
not to mention the stresses of competition.
FIGURE 24.9 Excessive levels of training volume and intensity can contribute to
overtraining.
Allostatic Load
Often overlooked aspects of an overtraining syndrome are
contributing factors outside the training hall or the competition
arena. These are many and varied, and in the context of overtraining
they have been termed the allostatic load (86, 107). Collectively,
the cumulative causes of stress (i.e., antecedents) produce the
various stress responses (i.e., allostatic load) (71, 86). The allostatic
load is created by various antecedents (i.e., contributing factors) that
1698

produce adverse responses of the body that are part of the stress
responses. To better understand the stress, various algorithms have
been created to help make sense of all the antecedents that
contribute to this problem (21). In this stress model, if the allostatic
load is too great, illness or disease can result. A simple description of
the allostatic load is the wear and tear on the body (103). The
concept of allostatic load was originally presented in 1993 (86) and
is a central concept for the study of how humans respond and adapt
to stresses (71). If we now apply the concept of allostatic loads to
overtraining syndrome, we see that the totality of stresses to the
body include primary factors that are part of the training and
recovery process and secondary factors that also contribute to the
overtraining syndrome but are not part of training and competition.
Collectively, the allostatic load can create a large stress that must be
considered by the strength and conditioning professional when
planning training programs to avoid overtraining.
Figure 24.10 illustrates how these secondary factors can
contribute to an overtraining syndrome. One important note is that
these secondary factors that can contribute to the overtraining
syndrome can also be caused by an overtraining syndrome. The
challenge is to determine if these factors exist outside the training
program and add to the overtraining stress or if they are created by
overtraining. Many factors have been identified as possibly
contributing to overtraining syndrome (107, 110) and are shown in
figure 24.10 (1, 8, 26, 29, 31, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 45, 52, 54-57,
60, 62, 76, 80, 81, 88, 98, 102, 111, 118-120).
1699

FIGURE 24.10 Allostatic load includes all contributing factors to overtraining and
overtraining syndrome (OTS). Solid lines notate required factors or direct causes. Dashed
lines show contributing factors, not direct causes.
1700

Underperformance and Its Relation to
Overtraining and Overreaching
Despite the name of this chapter, all discussions regarding
overtraining and overreaching must start with the concept of
underperformance. Although all our efforts may go to creating
training programs to optimize performance, achieving excellence can
be very elusive. Seldom are all components of the training and
competition processes in complete synchrony. The job of a strength
and conditioning professional is to help navigate the athlete through
the many hurdles standing in the way of achieving absolute peak
performance. Although few, if any, may ever attain that level of
performance perfection, the task of the strength and conditioning
professional is to develop, prescribe, and apply the type of training
program that gives the athlete the best opportunity to reach that
goal. Therefore, it is not only necessary to know how to develop the
appropriately challenging training program required to reach this
level of performance but also to understand what is happening when
performance is less than expected (i.e., underperformance). We will
see that even though overtraining and overreaching can be
contributors to underperformance, many other factors can contribute
as well. Many may be beyond our control, but recognizing possible
contributing factors will permit the strength and conditioning
professional to determine what appropriate measures can be taken
to help the athlete when, despite all the effort, he or she comes up
short. In summary, not all cases of underperformance are due to
overtraining or overreaching (figure 24.11). When looking closely at
factors that can adversely influence performance, figure 24.12 lists a
number of factors that can interfere with optimum performance. As
with the stressors that contribute to allostatic load for OTS, many
nontraining variables can contribute to underperformance.
1701

FIGURE 24.11 The results of overtraining are one type of underperformance, but not all
types of underperformance are due to overtraining.
FIGURE 24.12 Underperformance is not necessarily the same thing as overtraining. Solid
lines depict direct causes. Dashed lines show contributing factors, not direct causes.
Not 
all 
cases 
of 
underperformance 
are 
due 
to
overtraining or overreaching.
One common training error that can be mistaken for overtraining
is due to the timing of the training program with the competition
1702

schedule. Figure 24.13 shows how even a training program that is
well designed to produce enhanced performance can be ineffective if
the training peak does not coincide with when the athlete needs to
perform (96). At first glance, overtraining may be blamed for the
underperformance, but the reality is that inappropriate timing, not
excessive training, was the cause.
1703

Performance-Related Variables Affected
by Overtraining and Overreaching
Up to this point we have discussed what contributes to overtraining
and overreaching, but at some point, the strength and conditioning
professional needs to know how and when performance is affected
(figure 24.14). To better understand performance decrements due to
overtraining, a number of studies have been performed both in the
laboratory and in the field (32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 41, 42, 76, 99,
100, 108, 133). One of the problems with this line of research is the
difficulty in creating an overtraining syndrome in the laboratory, and
when data are taken from actual athletes who have overtrained, the
lack of study control makes interpreting the data difficult.
Regardless, table 24.1 lists a number of performance measures that
have been shown to be adversely affected by overtraining or are
believed to be vulnerable to overtraining (18, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41,
42, 43, 50, 52, 78, 105, 106, 124, 139). The wide range of
performances that can be affected makes understanding the
practical implications of overtraining challenging. In general, when
overtraining in the weight room, speed (e.g., sprinting) is most
sensitive to overtraining and decreases before most other variables.
This is closely followed by decreases in power (force × velocity),
with maximal strength consistently being one of the last
performances to decrease. It is essential that the strength and
conditioning 
professionals 
monitor 
training 
performances 
to
determine if any of these performances are changing and to include
relevant variables in an athlete monitoring program.
1704

FIGURE 24.13 Training and performance timing. Not all impaired performances are due
to overtraining.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 180.
FIGURE 24.14 Influence of overtraining and overtraining syndrome on performance-
related variables.
1705

Physiological Mechanisms Associated
With Overreaching and Overtraining
As discussed earlier, not all forms of overtraining and the resulting
overtraining syndrome are identical. Furthermore, the symptoms and
physiological responses can also be quite different depending on the
individual and the characteristics of the training program. However, a
number of physiological systems have either been shown or
theorized to be affected by overtraining. It should be noted that
although these mechanisms can be the result of an overtraining
stimulus, it is also possible that if these conditions are preexisting,
they can also contribute to an overtraining syndrome and be
considered part of the allostatic load. Understanding the underlying
physiology can, in some cases, provide insight on preventive
strategies to help minimize the risk of developing overtraining
syndrome and the accompanying impairments in performance. Table
24.2 provides example references for each of the proposed
mechanisms, as well as the strength of the data supporting each.
1706

Assessment of Overreaching and
Overtraining
Ideally, a carefully designed athlete monitoring program is developed
to determine the training and recovery capabilities of each individual.
Qualities of the tests included in this program must be specific to the
training being performed or the physiological system involved (i.e.,
valid), reliable (i.e., capable of providing consistent results), sensitive
to the training and competition stimulus, and easy to incorporate
into the regular athlete monitoring program. Furthermore, those
administering the tests must precisely follow correct protocols and
must ensure that each person performing the tests provides a
maximal effort. If the tests are not administered correctly, the data
acquired will be meaningless. Once the tests are performed, an
efficient data management system must be used to help best
interpret the results rapidly and correctly. Rapid turnaround of test
results is important to permit adjustments in the training program
when needed.
TABLE 24.1 Performance-Related Variables Affected
by Overtraining and Overreaching
Performance variable
Sensitivity
Onset
STRENGTH
1RM (dynamic constant external resistance)
Low
Last to occur
Isometric force
Poor
Unknown
Isokinetic force
High
Within 1 week
Eccentric strength
Unknown
Unknown
Stimulated force
High
Within 1 week
Single joint
Poor
If isokinetic, 1 week; if
DCER, unknown
Multijoint
Moderate
Last to occur
1707

Performance variable
Sensitivity
Onset
RATE OF FORCE DEVELOPMENT
Single joint
Low
Unknown
Multijoint
Unknown
Unknown
POWER
Resistance exercise
High
Within 1+ weeks
Vertical jump height
Low
Seldom occurs
Vertical jump kinetics (various forces and
reactive strength)
High
Within 1 week
Vertical jump kinematics (positions, strategies)
High
Within 1 week
VELOCITY
Sprinting
High
Within 1+ weeks
Resistance exercise (DCER)
High
Within 1+ weeks
Change of direction and agility
Moderate
Within 1+ weeks
Efficiency of electrical activity (EMG-to-force
ratio)
High
Within days
OTHER VARIABLES
Self-efficacy (confidence)
High
Within 1 week
Perceptions of recovery
Very high
Within days
Desire to train
High
Within 1 week
Training capacity (toleration of high volumes
and frequent sessions)
Moderate
Slower to occur
Performance Testing
Figure 24.15 is a compilation of suggested performance tests for the
early detection of an impending overtraining syndrome. Remember,
impaired performance is one of the requirements for diagnosing
overtraining. While not all inclusive, these tests have either been
found to be sensitive to the increased training loads that accompany
1708

overtraining, or it has been theorized that they can provide helpful
information (2, 9, 10, 19, 32, 33, 35, 38, 42, 65, 90, 97, 105, 106,
108, 123, 125, 129, 133, 139).
Physiological Testing
Although the strength and conditioning professional does not
typically order medical or laboratory tests to monitor the health of
his or her athletes and the risk of overtraining, it is helpful to know
what types of tests are available and what information they provide.
Numerous types of medical and physiological tests have been used
to help combat the onset of overtraining syndrome. In general, the
meaningfulness of these tests has been equivocal, dependent on the
subjects being studied, the training program being performed, and
the sport being monitored. A detailed description of all the tests
possible is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the reader is
welcome to examine some of the following references to get an idea
of what is available (9, 10, 19, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 45, 50, 54-57, 59,
65, 72, 78-81, 84, 88, 89, 98, 104, 113, 123, 124, 126, 131, 138). In
general, numerous potentially helpful variables can be assessed from
the blood (e.g., hormones and neurohormones, interleukins,
cytokines, markers of muscle disruption or damage, immune
factors), cardiovascular measures (e.g., resting heart rate, heart rate
variability, oxygen uptake, muscle oxygen saturation), skeletal
muscle measures (e.g., heat shock proteins, cell-signaling pathways,
receptors), neuromuscular measures (e.g., motor unit recruitment or
EMG activity), and orthopedic factors (e.g., joint inflammation or
inhibitory input). Data of this type can help the researcher and the
practitioner better understand the effects of overtraining and
perhaps eventually provide reliable biomarkers of a developing
overtraining syndrome.
TABLE 24.2 Potential Physiological Mechanisms
Contributing to Overtraining Syndrome
Mechanism
Reference(s)
Evidence
1709

Mechanism
Reference(s)
Evidence
Sex-related factors
Kelly 2023 (68)
Inconclusive
Circadian rhythm disruption
Nobari et al. 2023
(102)
Likely
Cytokine disruption
Smith 2000 (118)
la Torre et al. 2023
(76)
Likely
Glutamine deficiency
la Torre et al. 2023
(76)
Possible
Decreased immune function
Smith 2003 (119)
Baker et al. 2022
(8)
Likely
Tissue trauma
Smith 2004 (120)
Possible
Central fatigue theory
Newsholme et al.
1991 (98)
Budgett et al. 2008
(15)
Possible
Glycogen deficiency
la Torre et al. 2023
(76)
Strong
Autonomic nervous system disruption
Israel 1976 (61)
Strong
Sympathetic overtraining syndrome (SOTS)
Fry et al. 1994 (36)
Fry et al. 2006 (41)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)
Strong for strength
and power training
Parasympathetic overtraining syndrome
(POTS)
Lehmann et al.
1991 (78)
Lehmann et al.
1999 (80)
Strong for aerobic
training
Oxidative stress
Lewis et al. 2018
(81)  
Possible
Dietary insufficiencies (e.g., fats, protein,
carbohydrate, micronutrients)
la Torre et al. 2023
(76)
Likely
Motor unit recruitment
Fry 1992 (31)
Likely
1710

Mechanism
Reference(s)
Evidence
Endocrine disruption (e.g., testosterone,
cortisol, tes/cort, growth hormone, hormone
receptors)
Adlercreutz et al.
1986 (1)
Fry & Kraemer
1997 (37)
Fry et al. 2005 (40)
Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)
Strong
Orthopedic inhibition
Fry et al. 2001 (39) Likely
Muscle cellular signaling
Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)
Strong
Neural modifications
Baker et al. 2022
(8)
Possible
Impaired cognitive function
Symons et al. 2023
(128)
Likely
Figure 24.15  Example performance and training
assessments for an athlete monitoring program to
minimize risk of developing overtraining syndrome.
Monitored training loads (internal and external)
Resting heart rate
Recovery heart rate
Muscle O2 saturation
Heart rate variability
Anaerobic thresholds
V̇O2max
RPE/lactate
Muscle O2 saturation
Ability to repeat a GXT
Ability to complete a training session
Vertical jump performance
Height
Kinetics (forces, power)
Kinematics (positions, strategies)
1711

Stiffness
Eccentric use ratio
Resistance exercise performance
Maximal strength
Velocity-load profile
Power-load profile
Bar velocity at same absolute load
Isometric mid-thigh pulls
Muscle endurance tests
Rate of force production
Sprint performance
Acceleration
First-step speed
Deceleration
Max velocity
Change of direction and agility performance
Reaction and movement time
Cognitive processing tests
Diet records
Sleep records
Training questionnaires
Competition data
Coaches’ subjective assessment
Psychological Measures
Up to this point, we have discussed exclusively quantitative
measurements of performance, training, or physiology. However, it
has been suggested that questionnaires using subjective measures
may be more useful for monitoring athletes and their risk of
overtraining (115). To that end, numerous survey instruments have
been developed to help monitor athlete perceptions of training
status and recovery. Table 24.3 lists a number of these tools that
strength and conditioning professionals may find helpful to use.
Several considerations when selecting a questionnaire for athlete
monitoring include the following:
1712

How long is the questionnaire, and how many items need to
be completed?
Has the questionnaire been validated?
Is the wording easy to understand for the intended audience?
Is it easy to process the data for a rapid turnaround?
Can the questionnaire be answered without any coercion?
Is the questionnaire sensitive to an overtraining stimulus?
All of these issues are essential to obtain helpful information. In
addition to overtraining-related surveys, several instruments are
available to determine the coaching motivational climate (44). It has
been clearly shown that the motivational orientation of the athlete as
well as the climate created by the coach has a large positive effect
on athlete effort, enjoyment, and retention in the sport. These
assessments do not need to be administered as often as training-
related questionnaires but can be a critical part of the athlete
monitoring program that is often overlooked. Needless to say, the
coaching climate is highly dependent on coaching strategies.
Another related aspect is the mental health and well-being of the
coach, which can directly affect athletes’ performance satisfaction
(7). Finally, it must be realized that the psychological well-being of
the athlete may be enhanced by reinforcing mindfulness traits (12,
20), creating both a caring climate and a task-oriented climate (44),
and being aware of mood states (95). It stands to reason that
mentally healthy athletes may be able to withstand the rigors of
stressful training better (64).
TABLE 24.3 Questionnaires for Monitoring
Overtraining and Overreaching and the Perceptions
of the Psychological Climate
Questionnaire
References
OVERTRAINING RELATED
Rating of perceived exertion (RPE)  
Borg 1982 (11)
1713

Questionnaire
References
CR10 RPE
Borg 1982 (11)
Profile of Mood States (POMS)
McNair et al. 1971 (87)
Morgan et al. 1987 (95)
37-item POMS
Coyne et al. 2018 (24)
Daily Analysis of Life Demands for Athletes (DALDA)
Rushall et al. 1990 (112)
Emotional Recovery Questionnaire (EmRecQ)
Lundqvist and Kenttä 2010
(83)
Multi-Component Training Distress Scale (MTDS)
Main and Grove 2009 (84)
Recovery-Stress Questionnaire for Coaches (REST-Q in
Sport)
Kellman 2002 (67)
Acute Recovery & Stress Scale (ARSS)
Kellman and Kölling 2019
(67)
Short Recovery & Stress Scale (SRSS)
Kellman and Kölling 2019
(67)
Recovery-Cue Inventory Questionnaire
Kellman et al. 2002 (66)
Total Quality Recovery Questionnaire (TQR)
Kenttä and Hassmén 2002
(70)
Perceived Recovery Status
Laurent et al. 2011 (77)
Rating of Fatigue Scale
Micklewright et al. 2017 (91)
Resistance Exercise Overtraining Questionnaire
Fry et al. (35, 41, 42, 43)
Hooper Index
Hooper et al. 1995 (59)
Training Distress Scale (TDS)
Grove et al. 2014 (51)
Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory (PFAI)
Conroy et al. 2002 (23)
PSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE RELATED
Task-Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire (TEOSQ)  
Fry and Moore 2019 (44)
Perceived Motivational Climate in Sport Questionnaire
(PMCSQ)
Fry and Moore 2019 (44)
Caring Climate Scale (CCS)  
Fry and Moore 2019 (44)
SLEEP RELATED
1714

Questionnaire
References
Pittsburgh Sleeping Quality Index (PSQI)
Buysse et al. 1989 (17)
Athlete Sleeping Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ)
Samuels et al. 2015 (114)
COACH MENTAL HEALTH RELATED
Multiday coach survey
Balk et al. 2019 (7)
1715

Recovery Methods and Strategies
Once overtraining or overreaching has occurred and the individual
has developed an overtraining syndrome, the most important next
step is developing a recovery plan. An important consideration is
that overtraining often has a complex and sometimes slow onset and
is not rapidly reversed. Table 24.4 lists some of the essential or
suggested measures that must be taken when overtraining occurs.
Training Factors for Recovery
Once overtraining occurs and overtraining syndrome has developed,
the first thing that must be done is a careful revision of the training
program. A rapid decrease in the training volume, intensity, or both
is typically warranted. When overreaching has occurred, training
cessation has permitted performance to return to original levels in as
little as one week (36, 37, 87, 88, 111, 139). When more serious
levels of overtraining have occurred, recovery can take as long as
four weeks after high-intensity resistance exercise (35) or months to
a year after high-volume distance running (78). In each case,
training volume or intensity was immediately decreased or removed.
It may not always be practical or desirable to cease training,
depending on each individual case. Although it has been suggested
that one week of resistance training cessation does not benefit
strength and hypertrophy gains, the training did not incorporate
training similar to overtraining or overreaching (22). Regardless,
decreasing or eliminating the training stress is mandatory when
overtraining has occurred.
TABLE 24.4 Possible Strategies for Recovering From
Overtraining, Overreaching, and the Overtraining
Syndrome
Strategy or method
Reference(s)
Effectiveness
TRAINING FACTORS
1716

Strategy or method
Reference(s)
Effectiveness
Modify training program (e.g., decrease
volume, frequency, intensity, training
cessation)
Fry et al. 1994 (33)
Fry et al. 2006 (41)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)
Most strong
Training taper (related to above items)
Mujika and Padilla
2003 (96)
Strong
RECOVERY MODALITIES
Mindfulness-based interventions
Cao et al. 2022 (20)
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Promising
Bed rest
Spiering et al. 2023
(121)
Good for injuries,
poor for fitness
Vibration foam rolling
Alonso-Calvete et al.
2022 (3)
Possible
Massage
Li et al. 2024 (82)
Inconclusive
Myofascial release
Martínez-Aranda et
al. 2024 (85)
Possible
Quality sleep
Cunha et al. 2023
(26)
Strong
Compression garments
Li et al. 2024 (82)
Possible
Hydration
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Possible
Acupuncture
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Possible
Red-light therapy
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Possible
DIET AND SUPPLEMENTATION
Branched chain amino acids
Salem et al. 2024
(113)
Possible
Protein
Res et al. 2012 (109)
Possible
Carbohydrates
Li et al. 2024 (82)
Promising
1717

Strategy or method
Reference(s)
Effectiveness
Nitrates
Gamonales et al.
2022 (47)
Possible
L-glutamine
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Possible
Vitamins
Mihajlovic et al. 2023
(92)
Possible
Oral ATP
Wilson et al. 2013
(136)
Possible
CRYOTHERAPY
Cold-water immersion
Moore et al. 2022
(94)
Xiao et al. 2023
(138)
Promising
Other cryotherapy-related methods
Li et al. 2024 (82)
Inconclusive
Recovery Modalities
Many recovery modalities have been successfully used by therapists
for medically related conditions. It stands to reason that these
methods may also be effective countermeasures for those recovering
from overtraining, but there are few data supporting these methods
for this purpose. Nevertheless, table 24.4 lists a number of methods
that show promise for helping the recovery process.
Integrating Recovery Methods Into the
Training Process
Before 
overtraining 
occurs, 
the 
strength 
and 
conditioning
professional must be aware of risk factors that can be controlled.
The top part of figure 24.16 lists some of these factors, many of
which can be readily controlled. The middle part of figure 24.16 lists
several items that may be helpful when interpreting physiological
data. For more detail on the specifics of these overtraining
considerations, the reader is referred to the references listed in table
1718

24.4 (page 792) and the reviews and chapters cited earlier in this
chapter. Finally, the bottom part of figure 24.16 provides action
items that can be implemented easily to help the practitioner avoid
the onset of overtraining and overtraining syndrome. Before
implementing an athlete monitoring program or a system to
diagnose an overtraining syndrome, Bernaciková and colleagues (9)
suggest classifying any intended tests using three categories of
assessments:
Category I. Daily tests, easy to administer, inexpensive, rapid
turnaround of results, convenient for the coach and athlete
Category II. Every few days, more complex, longer
questionnaires, slightly more inconvenient to the athlete than
category I, rapid turnaround of results
Category III. Occasionally administered (e.g., once a month),
more involved and intrusive, more expensive, longer
turnaround time for the results
Figure 24.16  Overtraining risk factors,
considerations, and strategies to minimize risk of
developing an overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Risk Factors
Lack of close monitoring of the training program (rest days, prior exposure
to stressful training)
Training and activities outside the weight room, which can be a problem
Use of virtual coaching with no face-to-face contact
Lack of any objective monitoring
Training higher level and more fit athletes
Unmonitored recovery training sessions
Training during Olympic or world championship training blocks (i.e., final
training phase for an ultimate competition)
Failure to implement an appropriate training taper
Coaching performed by someone with little coaching experience or training
Change of training environment (e.g., heat or cold, humidity, altitude)
1719

Overtraining Considerations
Not all types of overtraining are identical.
Strength is well-protected.
Speed and power may be more sensitive to overtraining.
Psychological variables may be effective markers.
Hormonal variables indicate stress, not OT.
Orthopedic problems present different OTS.
Autonomic nervous system activity responds rapidly to OT.
Muscle fiber maladaptation can follow.
Overtraining Avoidance Strategies
Use active and passive recovery methods during training.
Allow one or more days of routine training abstinence to enhance recovery.
Rest days are critical.
Limit excessively long training sessions and too many sessions in a day.
Exercise caution with excessive training volumes and large increases in
training volume (>30% increases).
Prior exposure to stressful training enhances training stress tolerance.
Variation in the training stimulus is critical, and use of periodized training is
important.
Avoid excessive training to failure.
Coordinate resistance exercise with other stressors (e.g., sport training and
other conditioning).
Incorporate recovery strategies (e.g., sleep, diet, mental skills).
Appropriate diet for training (e.g., adequate Kcal, protein ingestion, glycogen
repletion, sufficient vitamins and minerals, adequate fluid intake).
Dietary supplements may help (e.g., recovery drinks, protein and
carbohydrate supplements, creatine, oral ATP).
Monitor outside stressors.
Monitor internal and external training loads.
Incorporate an athlete monitoring program.
It is suggested that category I testing be performed first. If the
results suggest possible overtraining concerns, testing for category
II is warranted. Likewise, if the category II test suggests an
1720

overtraining problem, a category III test may be performed. In this
manner, unnecessary testing can be avoided.
1721

Conclusion
The occurrence of overtraining or nonfunctional overreaching can be
devastating to those athletes training for high performance. Not only
does it mean they are not able to perform as planned, but it can also
mean that training and performance are impaired for an extended
period of time. While those who are seriously training may want to
push themselves as much as possible, they must be careful not to
pass the threshold so that overtraining occurs. Due to the complex
nature of this problem, it can result in the maladaptation of many
physiological systems (figure 24.17). Conversely, preexisting
problems in any of these physiological systems can also contribute to
an overtraining syndrome. Overall, we have discussed in this chapter
how everything revolves around the impaired performances caused
by improper training (figure 24.18). However, it is clear that many
factors can contribute to this problem. Knowledge of the causes and
effects of overtraining and how to avoid it and recover from it are
valuable tools for every successful strength and conditioning
professional.
1722

FIGURE 24.17 Overtraining syndrome can affect numerous physiological systems that in
turn can contribute to impaired performance.
Adapted by permission from A.C. Fry, “The Role of Training Intensity in Resistance Exercise Overtraining and
Overreaching,” in Overtraining in Sports, edited by R.B. Kreider, A.C. Fry, and M.L. O’Toole (Human Kinetics, 1998),
107-130.
1723

FIGURE 24.18 Summary of factors contributing to overtraining syndrome and different
levels of performance impairment. Additionally, many factors other than overtraining can
result in underperformance.
KEY TERMS
Addisonoid syndrome
adrenal exhaustion
adrenaline
allostatic load
antecedents
autonomic nervous system
catecholamines
coefficient of variation
down-regulation
epinephrine
functional overreaching (FOR)
general adaptation syndrome (GAS)
1724

nonfunctional overreaching (NFOR)
overreaching (OR)
overtraining
overtraining syndrome (OTS)
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome (POTS)
performance stagnation
recovery
relative energy deficiency syndrome (RED-S)
stress
sympathetic overtraining syndrome (SOTS)
underperformance
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is required for an overtraining
syndrome to exist?
  a.  impaired performances requiring long-term recovery
  b.  decreased testosterone and increased cortisol
concentrations
  c.  lack of success in athletic competitions
  d.  accumulation of nontraining or sport stresses
  2.  What types of physical performances are first affected by
overtraining or overreaching?
  a.  high-velocity activities
  b.  maximum strength tasks
  c.  oxygen uptake capabilities
  d.  repeated interval tasks
  3.  If factors outside of the training program or sport contests are
contributing to overtraining syndrome, what is this collection
of factors called?
  a.  allostatic load
  b.  psychosocial dysfunction
  c.  program volume-load
  d.  autonomic nervous system dysfunction
1725

  4.  When correctly implemented, which of the following can be an
effective training tool?
  a.  functional overreaching
  b.  nonfunctional overreaching
  c.  allostatic monitoring phase
  d.  kinetic modulation ratio adjustments
  5.  Monitoring for overtraining avoidance should include which of
the following?
  a.  relevant assessments that are easy to administer and have
rapid turnaround of results
  b.  detailed cellular and molecular evaluations to determine
the causes of impaired performances
  c.  blood sampling for hormone testing of overtraining-related
biomarkers
  d.  determination of key training thresholds that all individuals
should avoid
1726
