CHAPTER 25
FACILITY DESIGN, LAYOUT,
AND ORGANIZATION
Ryan Metzger, MS, Ryan Fowler, MS, and Eric L.
McMahon, MEd
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Andrea Hudy,
Michael Greenwood, and Lori Greenwood to this chapter.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identify the aspects and phases of new strength and
conditioning facility design;
identify the aspects of updating or renovating an existing
strength and conditioning facility and transitioning an existing
building or space for strength and conditioning use;
explain how to assess the needs of an athletic program to
design a facility that is well suited to these needs, including the
planning of training spaces to accommodate various size
groups of athletes and coaches;
explain how to design specific facility features, including
supervision location, access, ceiling height, flooring,
environmental factors, electrical service, mirrors, and storage;
explain how to arrange equipment in organized groups,
creating better traffic flow and enhancing safety throughout the
facility; and
1727

explain the maintenance and cleaning needs for the surfaces
and equipment in a strength and conditioning facility.
Organizing the construction and design of a strength and
conditioning facility requires a well-thought-out plan created by a
committee of experienced professionals. This chapter provides
information on the different phases of planning a new facility, along
with details about facility design, organization, and equipment
maintenance. The chapter also outlines the phases of construction or
remodeling of a facility. The design should account for the needs of
various stakeholders (e.g., athletes, staff, administrators) for the
layout to be most efficient.
1728

General Aspects of New Facility Design
Building a new facility takes significant time and planning. One of
the first things to do is assemble a committee of professionals. The
committee should consist of a builder, architect, designers, lawyers,
financial departments, and people who will be involved in using the
facility. At least one strength and conditioning professional, or other
expert who will be working in the facility, should be included in the
committee to provide a perspective that will help maximize the utility
and safety of the space. This committee will assist with the facility
design as well as consider economic factors of opening a new
facility. One of the main challenges in designing a strength and
conditioning facility is tailoring the facility to the intended audience.
Figure 25.1 outlines the four phases of designing a new facility,
along with the main objectives for each phase.
FIGURE 25.1 Phases and objectives of designing a new facility.
Predesign Phase
The predesign phase is the first step in building a new facility. This
phase should consist of a needs analysis, a feasibility study, and
master plan formation. At the end of the predesign phase, a
reputable architect should be hired—likely through a bid process—
and begin developing a blueprint for the facility.
The needs analysis is the step when the designers and experts
collaborate to determine the needs of the strength and conditioning
program (10). Examples of questions are “How much open space do
1729

you need?” and “What equipment needs to fit into the allotted
space?” The needs analysis should be consistent with the specific
programming needs of the strength and conditioning and athletic
departments. For example, if a strength and conditioning
professional regularly incorporates jump testing on force plates
during weight room sessions, an area needs to be set aside for that
activity. For those serving on the design committee, the needs
analysis should convey an effective environment to properly
implement the intended program. While site, budget, construction,
and other limitations may require a certain level of flexibility as the
project progresses, safety considerations for facility users should not
be jeopardized (2-7, 9-17, 19-22).
The second part of the predesign phase is called a feasibility
study. This process should analyze strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats (known as a SWOT analysis) (10). The
goal of the feasibility study is to ensure that the financial investment
will yield a viable and sustainable return. The feasibility study should
also evaluate the location, strengths and weaknesses of any
proposed ideas, and the growth potential for strength and
conditioning and related programs within the department. The
potential opportunities and competition threats also need to be
considered. This includes market evaluation to identify the best
opportunity to train athletes most efficiently, as well as analyzing the
target market and growth potential of competing facilities. In the
collegiate environment, this may include comparisons to other
facilities in the athletic conference or be related to athlete recruiting
goals. The aim of the feasibility study is to help determine if the
facility will have an opportunity for success against competing
programs and businesses.
The master plan is the general plan for all phases of the new
facility. The master plan should include the building and construction
plan, facility design, budget information, and an operational plan to
act on once the facility is completed (10). The operational plan
should consist of short-term and long-term goals that will enhance
1730

the success of the facility both in the near term and in the future.
The operational plan should also include staff development and a
plan for the hiring process.
Hiring an architect is the final step of the predesign phase.
Selecting an architect is crucial for meeting administration and
department goals. It is important to select from a list of architects
who have a positive reputation based on previous work. If possible,
it is best to choose an architect who has had previous experience in
the strength and conditioning industry. The architect will likely be
hired through a bid process, meaning that the architect who is hired
is often the one who submits the lowest price. Bid plans require
efficient use of resources so that the money is spent on what is most
useful for the users of the facility.
Design Phase
The design phase is the second phase in the process of building a
new facility. In the design phase, ideas from the committee come
together with regard to the structure and design elements of the
facility. It is extremely important to plan around the flow of the
facility while adhering to all relevant regulations and codes. Federal,
state, and city codes are often highly specific about aspects of the
design. City planning departments can provide the local guidelines
and applicable codes for constructing a facility.
The first step in the design phase is finalizing the design
committee. To reiterate, the committee should include strength and
conditioning and other athletic department professionals with
experience in facility planning and design. This is also the phase
when the designers need to work closely with the architect to
produce a blueprint of the facility.
The blueprint and design need to consider the equipment
specifications. This will help with the flow of the facility and will
influence how effectively people can move from one area of the
facility to another once it is operational. Traffic flow is one of the
most important aspects of designing the facility. Creating easy
1731

access for people will have the greatest effect on the function and
safety of the facility when multiple groups of athletes are present at
the same time. The flow of traffic should also allow coaches or
supervisors to have a clear view of the entire floor. The locations of
any structural pillars, columns, or other obstructions must be
considered in the planning of equipment spaces to account for traffic
flow and access to emergency exits.
Construction Phase
The construction phase is the period of time from the beginning
of building the facility until completion. This is usually the longest
phase of the process. During construction, the committee needs to
continually refer to the master plan to ensure that the project is on
track with regard to the established goals and design. Keeping the
project on track in relation to the deadline must also become a
priority. Delays in construction can add significant financial strain.
Having access to legal counsel is beneficial to making sure that
construction deadlines are met and extra expenses and legal action
are avoided.
Preoperation Phase
The preoperation phase consists of the final steps before the
facility can open. These steps include finishing the interior decor
(note that appearance can greatly enhance the experience of users),
aesthetic considerations to support athlete recruiting or membership
enrollment, and hiring a staff of qualified professionals. The staff
should have at least the minimum required certifications and
education. For example, the National Collegiate Athletic Association
enforces regulations that require strength and conditioning
professionals to be certified by a nationally accredited organization.
In addition, many professional sport leagues and tactical positions
mandate that a strength and conditioning professional is a Certified
Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) through the National
Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA). Finding hardworking,
1732

knowledgeable, loyal, and trustworthy employees is crucial to
running a successful strength and conditioning program. During the
preoperation phase, it is important to include a plan for staff
development as well. This could vary from semiannual workshops to
weekly staff meetings.
During the preoperation phase it is vital to create a plan that will
make opening the facility easy. For example, duties such as cleaning
and maintenance should be delegated to the staff on a weekly basis.
This is easier to do when a cleaning and maintenance schedule has
been created and is followed as soon as the facility is operating.
Also during preoperation, a plan for administrative and clerical
duties should be created to organize work related to matters such as
liability insurance, scheduling, and budgeting. Details, such as
choosing a scheduling software package, installing an athlete
management system, and delegating clerical duties, should be
accounted for before the facility opens.
1733

Existing Strength and Conditioning
Facilities
Modifying an existing strength and conditioning facility is similar to
designing a new facility, without the process of building from the
ground up. A design committee can also be formed for renovating an
existing facility, but members such as a builder and architect may
not be necessary. An existing facility may also use different hiring
processes. Sometimes strength and conditioning professionals
continue to work in the same facility regardless of a change of
ownership or management. However, there should still be a focus on
standards, education, professionalism, and staff development. Figure
25.2 outlines the main steps in modifying an existing facility.
FIGURE 25.2 Steps in modifying an existing facility.
The strength and conditioning professional should
assess existing equipment based on the current and
future needs of everyone who uses the facility.
1734

Satellite Training Facilities
It has become common in recent years for college and professional
sport organizations to add alternative and sport-specific satellite
training facilities to accommodate the needs of growing strength and
conditioning departments. Other examples of this include providing a
strength and conditioning facility for visiting team use, as is
mandated by some professional sport leagues, or designing a studio
space for individualized or small group training sessions. Special
attention should be given when planning satellite training facilities,
especially if existing, dated, or nontraining spaces are being
converted for strength and conditioning use.
Satellite training facilities may benefit from smaller pieces of
equipment based on the size of the space available (e.g., half rack
vs. full rack). In small facilities, it can be beneficial to install
multipurpose pieces of equipment rather than equipment with a
single function (9). A satellite training facility that does not have
dedicated walkways separating the equipment areas should be set
up with equipment bolted and secured around the perimeter. The
center of the room should remain open for transitions between
training stations while allowing unimpeded access to emergency
exits. As a rule, equipment and safety spacing should never be
compromised due to limited space. In accordance with the NSCA
Strength and Conditioning Professional Standards and Guidelines
(16), and as explained in this chapter, a minimally compliant
facility must be in agreement with mandated building codes and
regulations, including accessibility (i.e., wheelchair access and ADA
compliance), HVAC, electrical, lighting, flooring, storage, square
footage, safety spaces, and overhead clearance and must possess
well-maintained equipment and surfaces.
1735

Outdoor Training Spaces
Weight room adjacent or satellite outdoor training spaces have
become more common in geographically moderate climates. In
addition, the global COVID-19 pandemic created increased
awareness among strength and conditioning professionals for the
benefit of social distancing, including the use of open-air outdoor
training spaces for enhanced ventilation (15). There are also
scenarios when scheduling or programming can be improved by
having strength and conditioning equipment available near sport or
practice facilities that do not have a dedicated weight room space.
While environmental factors, like weather, must always be
considered for athlete safety, this section provides recommendations
for the safe use of strength and conditioning equipment in outdoor
training areas.
Outdoor training spaces may include multipurpose training lockers
or pods and be located next to a game or practice field (e.g., grass
or artificial turf) or in proximity to the weight room (e.g., via garage
door access). Outdoor training spaces may be for seasonal or year-
round use depending on climate. Important considerations include
ensuring adequate space for strength and conditioning activity to be
performed safely and that standards for equipment, safety spacing,
and walkways are clear. Outdoor training surfaces must offer proper
traction for athletic activity and should not be wet or damp from
recent storms. Ground surface temperatures should also be
considered to avoid injury due to excessive heat or burns (e.g.,
artificial turf may have higher temperatures than surrounding
surfaces). Additional considerations should be placed on ensuring
appropriate athletic footwear and attire for strength and conditioning
sessions held outdoors.
Similar to indoor training spaces, outdoor training spaces should
have a posted emergency action plan that is understood by staff and
athletes. If training equipment is to be transported outside daily for
use, it is advisable for the coaching staff to make this task more
1736

ergonomic by using a dolly, cart, or wagon with sturdy wheels. All
strength and conditioning equipment should be inspected regularly,
especially if used outdoors, because being exposed to the elements
can accelerate wear.
1737

Assessing Athletic Program Needs
One of the more important considerations in building a strength and
conditioning facility is the needs and requirements of the athletes
and 
athletic 
program. 
The 
number 
of 
athletes, 
coaching
philosophies, athlete ages and experience levels, schedules and
availability, and equipment factors can affect the design of the
facility (12). When it is time to evaluate such needs, the facility
designers should be able to answer these questions:
How many athletes will use the facility? This is an important
consideration because the facility size will be greatly
influenced by the number of athletes using the facility at the
same time (i.e., at peak usage) and the total number who use
it per day, week, and season. The number of athletes will also
affect the scheduling and flow of the facility if two or more
groups are training simultaneously. Based on regulations such
as fire codes or other occupational health and safety
regulations, the city planning departments will specify the
maximum room capacity. In addition to the number of athletes
training, it is also essential to consider staffing and
supervision. 
The 
number 
of 
athletes 
being 
trained
simultaneously will affect the number of strength and
conditioning professionals required to safely and effectively
monitor the training session (16).
What are the training goals for the athletes, coaches, and
administration? Training goals will directly affect equipment
selection for the facility. For example, if a strength and
conditioning 
professional 
wants 
athletes 
to 
focus 
on
plyometrics and agility, the facility will need an area (turf or
field) designated for this purpose. The strength and
conditioning professional should also use collective training
goals of the various stakeholders as a guideline for ordering
equipment. If resistance training is to be programmed, racks
1738

and platforms are more space efficient compared to bench or
incline bench press setups that serve only one purpose.
What are the demographics of the athletes? The demographics
of the users are important when determining the equipment
needs of the facility. Are the users primarily older, younger,
male, female, middle school, high school, college, or
professional? A facility with primarily older populations may
not need as much free weight equipment as it does machines.
In a collegiate or team environment, use of the equipment
may be more efficient if it is grouped into sections so that
multiple groups can work out simultaneously without
interference.
What will the training experience of the athletes be like?
Answering this question will help the strength and conditioning
professional devise training plans, which in turn will dictate the
equipment needed. Training will vary according to the
experience of the athlete. Athletes with no previous resistance
training experience may do more bodyweight exercises than
advanced athletes, who may do more weightlifting. It is also
important to assess whether needs will change over time and
whether equipment requirements will vary depending on the
season.
How will training sessions be scheduled? The scheduling of
athletes or groups is one of the more difficult aspects of
running a facility. The number of people on staff, the layout,
and the design of the facility can all be affected by the training
schedule. If more than one group will be using the facility at
one time, it would make sense to divide the facility into
sections so the amount of overlap is limited. Ideally, training
sessions should be scheduled throughout the day to avoid
capacity issues during the busiest or most popular times. This
will help maintain suggested staff-to-athlete ratios and ensure
that enough equipment is available. (See chapter 26 for
additional details.)
1739

What technology is needed to administer training as intended?
Planning for technology is important to account for the
continued growth of the program. A strong Wi-Fi or Bluetooth
connection may be required if the intent is to deliver strength
and conditioning programs using technology devices, such as
tablets, TV monitors, or cell phone apps. Ensuring access to a
strong cellular signal can provide an additional layer of safety
in case of an emergency. Additionally, exercise testing and
monitoring equipment may require dedicated space to be
operated during training sessions and stored securely between
uses. This includes specific exercise testing devices, athlete
monitoring sensors, and accessories that may require special
cleaning, charging, and maintenance.
What equipment needs to be repaired or modified? No
equipment in a facility should have issues such as holes, cuts,
or missing pieces. If a cable is frayed or damaged, discontinue
using the cable column until the cable is replaced. All existing
equipment should be repaired or replaced if broken. Existing
equipment should be repaired promptly or should be sold to
provide funds for new equipment. In some cases, a piece of
equipment is in good repair but needs an accessory for an
upgrade. For example, cable columns may require new
attachments to be fully functional.
Once all of these questions are answered, the process of
designing the facility will be much easier. Ideally, the facility
designers should have a solution for every problem; this allows for
an optimal training environment. In reality, however, budget and
space limitations often stand in the way. It is important to focus on
what will affect the facility the most and to design from there. For
example, not having enough space will have a larger impact on the
training environment and scheduling than not having enough of a
specialized piece of equipment. The recommended minimum amount
of space is 100 square feet (9.3 m2) per individual, including all
1740

athletes, strength and conditioning professionals, and any additional
staff (e.g., athletic trainers) or persons present (16).
1741

Designing the Strength and
Conditioning Facility
Before arranging and positioning equipment, one must consider the
design of the strength and conditioning facility, whether new or
existing. The strength and conditioning professional should pay
particular attention to facility location and access, structural and
functional considerations, environmental factors, and safety and
supervision.
Location
The strength and conditioning facility ideally should be located on
the ground floor away from offices and classrooms. This will prevent
interruptions elsewhere in the building that are caused by dropped
weights, music, or other noises common to strength and
conditioning facilities. If the facility is not located on the ground
floor, the floor must be stable enough to support heavy equipment
and equipment that is dropped. The load-bearing capacity should be
at least 100 foot-pounds per square foot (4.8 kN/m2) (7).
Supervision Location
An office area for supervision should be in a central location with a
clear line of sight and windows or mirrors providing the opportunity
to look out and see everyone, including individuals and groups
entering or exiting the room. One option is to place the office at an
elevation over the floor of the weight room for better viewing.
Access
Every facility should be accessible to people with disabilities, with
either a ramp or a wheelchair lift for any change in height exceeding
0.5 inches (1.3 cm). A ramp should run 12 inches for every 1-inch
rise (30.5 cm run for every 2.5 cm rise) with a landing at the top
and bottom (3), and stairs should have a rough strip on the edge to
1742

help prevent anyone from falling. Another option for persons with
disabilities is a mechanical lift or an elevator.
Every facility should have at least one phone that is accessible to
persons in wheelchairs. This complies with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (3); it also provides safety in the event of an
emergency if the only person who can help is in a wheelchair. The
phone should be close to the entrance of the facility or near the
office area so that a supervisor can call emergency services as soon
as possible following an accident (2). The ADA also requires that
light switches, water fountains, fire extinguishers, and automated
external defibrillator (AED) devices are reachable and that safety
signage is viewable by persons in wheelchairs (3).
A weight room should also have double or garage doors so that
large equipment and machines can be moved in and out. However, if
the hallway or access point is too narrow, the size of the doors will
not make a difference (14), because an outside wall will have to be
removed temporarily when moving or installing equipment.
Ceiling Height
The ceiling should be high enough to accommodate any jumping or
explosive activities. This includes the height of the athlete plus the
space required for box jumps, vertical jumps, and weightlifting
exercises. A recommended height is 12 to 14 feet (3.7-4.3 m), which
should give enough clearance to allow athletes to comfortably
perform most activities (14, 18). Certain exercises, such as overhead
medicine ball throws, may require additional overhead clearance. In
scenarios when sufficient overhead clearance is not available to
perform an exercise, using a nearby outdoor field, fieldhouse, or
gymnasium should yield enough space. However, these decisions
related to session management should be initiated in the planning
and design process to account for the impact on additional traffic
flow in and out of the facility during training sessions.
1743

Flooring
Several types of flooring options are available for a strength and
conditioning facility. The most common option is some type of
rubber flooring and an antimicrobial carpet. Another option is indoor
turf, which can be useful if the strength and conditioning
professional plans to have athletes perform dynamic warm-up,
plyometric, agility, or conditioning exercises. Turf is also a good
surface for ground-based movements and sled pushes that require a
more field-like surface than typical gym flooring. Rubber flooring is
available in rolls, tile inserts, and mats and is considered a premier
option because it protects the subfloor from heavy weights and
provides durable cushioning. Rubber flooring can also be easier to
clean than carpet and is generally more durable and long-lasting
within a facility. As a general rule for safety, floor surfaces in physical
activity areas should be slip-resistant to minimize the risk of exercise
and fall-related injuries (2).
For facilities designed to train athletes for weightlifting
competitions, platforms should have a middle portion made of wood
and outer sections made of rubber, in alignment with competition
rules. Especially in high-traffic strength and conditioning facilities,
inlaid platforms are a safer alternative to raised platforms because
they are flush with the floor and do not present a tripping hazard.
Lighting
Strength and conditioning facilities have special lighting needs to
keep athletes safe and focused on training. Key lighting
considerations should include energy efficiency and the use of
natural lighting when possible (11). To determine proper lighting,
one must consider the square footage of the facility, ceiling height,
and the amount of natural sunlight entering the facility through
windows. Lighting is recommended between 20 to 30 foot candles
(fc; 1 fc = lumen/ft2) or 200 to 300 lux (lx; 1 lx = lumen/m2) at floor
level for general gym areas and up to 50 foot candles or 500 lux for
dedicated resistance training and group exercise areas (2, 11, 18).
1744

The distribution of light throughout the facility is important to
avoid shadowy areas or excessive glare. Glare from direct overhead
lighting is especially a concern for users lying on horizontal benches
or exercise mats (18). Windows can help make a facility feel more
open and modern, and mirrors may enhance the amount of light
that comes in by reflecting it to spots in the room without natural
light (2). Light-emitting diode (LED) lights are a popular choice
because of their extended life span and energy efficiency (2). Lights
with color temperatures between 4,000° and 5,000° Kelvin are
considered best for strength and conditioning facilities because they
resemble daylight, provide optimal visibility for enhanced safety, and
can have an energizing effect. Finally, adjustable lighting controls,
automated on-and-off settings, and motion sensors also can be
considered to reduce power consumption, energy costs, and
maintenance (11).
Room Temperature, Humidity, and
Ventilation
A strength and conditioning facility needs to maintain a comfortable
training temperature. The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) system should have the capability to heat and cool individual
sections of the facility. Most sources indicate that between 68 °F and
78 °F (20-26 °C) is an appropriate temperature range, with many
suggesting an optimal range of 68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C) (2, 5, 18).
If the facility is too hot or too cold, the athletes and staff may be
uncomfortable and the quality of training will be affected.
Relative humidity should also be monitored in the strength and
conditioning facility (6). In any space where there is physical activity,
relative humidity should not exceed 60%. This helps to prevent
bacterial and microbial growth, avoiding the spread of infections and
disease (2, 15). In addition, areas in a facility with excessive
moisture can contribute to rust and damage weight room equipment
(5). This may be more of a concern if the weight training facility is
located near a humid pool or spa area within the building. Ensuring
1745

that any adjacent pool or spa areas are equipped with negative
exhaust air flow helps to prevent moisture and chlorine odor from
escaping into other areas of the training facility (2).
Ventilation and circulation are primary concerns with regard to
facility design and the HVAC system. The HVAC system, a fresh air
exchange system, and ceiling or box fans should provide necessary
ventilation and circulation that are in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE
62.1 requirements for health clubs and weight rooms (6). Air
systems must provide air circulation at proper levels according to the
needs of specific equipment areas and occupant loads (6). For
example, aerobic training areas require a higher circulation rate than
resistance training spaces (2). Room air should be exchanged a
minimum of 8 to 10 times per hour—optimally 12 to 15 times per
hour to prevent odors and stagnant air (5). If fans are used, a
general guideline is two to four fans for every 1,200 square feet (111
m2). Fans help keep the air from feeling stagnant and muggy, which
makes for a better training environment.
Sound Systems and Noise Control
While not essential, many facilities have sound systems that help
create a motivating training environment conducive to hard work.
The two main considerations for installing a sound system are
speaker volume and placement. The sound volume should be less
than 90 decibels so that athletes can hear instructions and coaching
cues (2). To avoid damage, speakers should be elevated above the
height of all training equipment. Placing speakers in the corner
allows sound to project toward the middle of the room so that it is
more 
evenly 
distributed. 
The 
use 
of 
headphones 
is 
not
recommended. Headphones can interfere with coaching and
instruction and limit athletes’ awareness of their surroundings in the
case of an emergency.
Background noise and excess external noise are other issues to
consider. Such sounds can emanate from sources ranging from the
HVAC system to the people in the next building. In a facility that has
1746

yoga or dance classes, sound-absorbing material should be used in
the floors and walls to prevent music from reaching others in the
facility. Absorbent rubber flooring can be used to reduce noise
caused by people jumping, running, or dropping things.
Electrical Service and Devices
A strength and conditioning facility typically requires more outlets
than other buildings. Some outlets may require relatively higher
voltage for more powerful equipment, such as stair climbers,
elliptical trainers, and treadmills. The electrical service also needs to
be properly grounded to protect the system from lightning strikes or
power surges. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) outlets are also
necessary to ensure safety in the event of an electrical short (1).
With the increase of technology now being used in weight rooms,
the placement of wall, floor, and elevated power outlets should be
considered to limit future issues with devices and power cords once
the facility becomes operational. Specifically, power cords should
never extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter areas. In addition, any equipment and device charging
stations should be in an office or storage area away from weight
room traffic. If televisions will be used in the facility, the use of
elevated outlets and secured wall or ceiling mounts are
recommended. Planning ahead for the use of technology is valuable,
especially if the intent is to use television monitors or overhead
projectors to communicate workouts and announcements.
Walls and Mirrors
Mirrors can be used for many purposes in a strength and
conditioning facility. They can be used as a coaching tool if racks and
platforms are placed in the right position, because they provide
immediate visual feedback for improved spatial awareness and
safety (14). Mirrors can also be used to enhance a room
aesthetically.
1747

Mirrors should be placed at least 6 inches (15 cm) away from any
equipment (e.g., behind a rack of dumbbells) and a minimum of 20
inches (51 cm) above the floor (4). The purpose of the height
guideline is to ensure that weights do not roll, bounce, or slide into
the bottom of the mirror and cause the glass to break. The standard
weight plate is 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter, giving mirrors a 2-inch
(5 cm) clearance if the plate is dropped near the mirror or leaned
against the wall behind the mirror (14).
Bumper railings or padding may be useful for places that require
added protection from damage, such as walls and mirrors. Railings
are also used in dance and yoga studios so people can hold on for
balance when necessary. Balance railings should be installed
securely with safety in mind and checked regularly before any
weight-bearing activity. The choice of material and beam structure
used for constructing walls (e.g., drywall or cinder block) should be
considered for properly securing balance railings and other wall
attachments. Also, strength and conditioning professionals who plan
to program medicine ball throws into a wall should make sure to use
a solid wall, such as cinder block, to prevent damage.
Hydration and Nutrition Spaces in the
Weight Room
Drinking fountains and water bottle refill stations are important
additions to a strength and conditioning facility. They should be
located away from the training area and should not interrupt traffic
flow. Water stations and nutrition areas are often placed next to the
entrance of the facility or next to the bathrooms and lockers. With
the increased emphasis on nutrition and recovery for athletes,
nutrition areas that include food preparation and appliances, such as
blenders, knives, cutting boards, and refrigeration, are subject to
safe food handling requirements. In the United States, such
requirements 
are 
governed 
by 
the 
U.S. 
Food 
and 
Drug
Administration (22), U.S. Department of Agriculture (22), and U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (19), all of which
1748

have policies and recommendations to avoid food poisoning and
food contamination. (See Standard 9.1 in the NSCA Strength and
Conditioning Professional Standards and Guidelines for additional
detail on the responsibility of strength and conditioning professionals
related to supplements, ergogenic aids, and drugs [16].)
Locker and Changing Room Access
Access to locker rooms is a good benefit within a facility. At
minimum, having a shower located somewhere in the building
ensures that cleaning up after a workout will be convenient. Good
hygiene is important for preventing the spread of infections and
disease. Although not everyone will use the showers or lockers,
having them available for on-the-go athletes may boost morale and
give them another reason to work hard during a workout.
Storage Spaces
A strength and conditioning facility should have a dedicated storage
space to keep items such as extra equipment, cleaning supplies,
facility maintenance tools, or broken equipment. A larger facility with
more equipment requires more storage space than a small facility.
Depending on the layout of the facility, or if it has multiple floors,
multiple storage areas may be best to avoid excessive clutter or
injury from equipment not being used. For example, an athlete or
strength and conditioning professional may injure his or her fingers
while racking and storing weights on a plate tree in a space that is
too narrow and filled with unnecessary equipment accessories.
Additional areas to watch for excessive clutter include underneath
dumbbell storage racks, around shelving units, in suspension training
areas (8), and in corners and other tight spaces. Making sure that
equipment is stored safely and securely improves weight room
organization and maintains the longevity of the equipment.
In addition to the storage of training equipment, all necessary
emergency equipment should be kept in or near the training facility
to be quickly accessible (16). Such equipment must include a fire
1749

extinguisher, AED, CPR equipment, and a stocked first aid kit.
Additional details about emergency policies and action plans are
presented in chapter 26.
Other areas to consider related to storage include determining
where athletes will store personal items, such as coats, backpacks,
and water bottles, during training sessions. If no locker room is
available at the facility, designating an area for personal item storage
is important to avoid clutter. The use of cube storage, shelving, or
other functional storage solutions can help maintain organizational
flow of the weight room.
1750

Arranging Equipment in the Strength
and Conditioning Facility
It is essential to consider spacing requirements when arranging
equipment in the strength and conditioning facility. A floor plan can
be drawn to help with visualizing how to arrange equipment,
especially since each type of equipment and mode of exercise comes
with its own safety and efficiency recommendations.
Equipment Placement
Equipment should be grouped into sections such as a stretching and
warm-up area, agility and plyometrics, free weights, aerobic area,
and resistance machines. Ideally, free weights and racks should be
organized along the wall, and there should be walkways between the
free weights and machines (1). Racks and machines also can be
placed in rows with the back of the equipment facing each other.
This allows for improved flow through the weight room, preventing
congestion and maximizing usage space.
Using line of sight as a guideline, shorter equipment is better
placed in the middle of the room so that strength and conditioning
professionals and staff can easily see across the facility. Planning
ahead and organizing the equipment so it can be used as a circuit or
exercise pairing will also help with traffic flow. Tall machines should
be bolted to the floor, a column, or the wall to prevent tipping over.
Cardiovascular machines should be in their own section and
should be lined up and organized such that the treadmills, elliptical
trainers, stair climbers, ski trainers, rowers, and bikes are grouped
together. Similarly, dedicated exercise and performance testing
devices should be in their own section and grouped to ensure the
consistent 
administration, 
validity, 
and 
reliability 
of 
testing
procedures. Keep in mind that most machines requiring electricity
will have to be along a wall unless electrical outlets are available in
the floor or on a column. Equipment should also be placed away
1751

from the walkway to minimize the chances of someone tripping over
it or on associated electrical cords.
Racks, barbells, and dumbbells should have a minimum of 3 feet
(0.9 m) of space between equipment to allow for movement without
danger to the athlete or spotter. If a spotter or multiple spotters are
needed (e.g., on a rack), providing additional space may be
required.
Traffic Flow
Traffic flow is heavily influenced by equipment placement. Many
facilities are one big room, and walkways can be created via
arrangement of the equipment. As mentioned, most racks or
machines are best placed lined up in a row running the length of the
facility. This usually creates two or three main walkways that should
be 5 to 7 feet (1.5-2.1 m) wide (2, 3, 13). For safety, all individuals
in the training facility should have clear access to an exit at all times.
Ensuring proper equipment and walkway spacing is important for
allowing clearance to move freely throughout the facility and for
ADA-required wheelchair access (3, 13).
Weight Room Pillars and Building
Structures
When placing equipment in facilities that contain supporting
structure, such as weight room pillars, columns, or other weight
room obstructions, logistical planning for training sessions and safety
factors should be prioritized. Due to the large size of many strength
and conditioning facilities, the inclusion of weight-supporting and
other building structures may be unavoidable. Strategically placing
training equipment with consideration of any vertical weight room
pillars or horizontal structural beams and designating specific
exercise and storage areas within the facility layout considering
proximity to building structures minimize facility congestion and will
improve training session organization. Adhering to the safety spacing
1752

and equipment guidelines in this chapter around building structures
will improve the functionality and traffic flow of the facility.
Safety, function, and traffic flow are top priorities when
deciding on the placement of equipment in a facility.
Stretching and Warm-Up Area
A stretching and warm-up area is an open area with soft tissue
instruments, mats, or elastic bands. This area may include foam
rollers and other tissue rolling tools (e.g., PVC pipes, and lacrosse,
tennis, golf, or softball balls) and jump ropes. Mats can be used so
that athletes do not have to lie on a hard floor, but this is not
necessary.
Circuit Training Area
A circuit training area is typically a space with machines lined up or
grouped together to make it easy for people to switch from one
machine to the next. Grouping the machines can be done in several
ways. Examples of different groupings include upper body and lower
body, pushing actions and pulling actions, and various body part
groupings. In many facilities, injured athletes use the circuit
machines to exercise the body parts that are still healthy. Ease of
access between machines should be kept in mind so that injured
athletes can move freely. Stationary circuit training machines should
be at least 30 inches (76 cm) (3), preferably 36 inches (91 cm),
away from each other to provide a wide enough area and some
extra space for safety. Safety spacing in the weight room is generally
referred to as a safety cushion.
Free Weights
Free weight equipment includes dumbbells, barbells, benches,
kettlebells, farmer’s walk handles, hexagonal bars, squat racks, and
any other equipment necessary to use these items. Kettlebells can
be lined up neatly under a dumbbell rack or in their own section.
1753

Since most activities with a kettlebell are dynamic and require space
to complete a variety of movements, this section should be large
enough to accommodate both the exercises being performed and
the number of athletes using the space simultaneously.
Weightlifting Area
A weightlifting area generally contains racks with platforms or a
platform standing alone. It could also be an open area where
weightlifting is performed without a platform. This is typically done
on a rubber floor with a concrete foundation. To keep things
organized, weight trees or racks and bar holders can be used when
the equipment is not in use.
Racks and platforms should have enough room between them
that if someone were to fall, people nearby would not be injured.
Weightlifting racks should be bolted to the floor to ensure that they
do not move when in use. If a rack is portable, it should be moved
to a designated storage area when not in use.
Exercise and Performance Testing Spaces
Exercise testing equipment should be in their own section or
dedicated space. Exercise testing spaces are where equipment is
grouped together for exercise testing sessions. This equipment may
consist of force plates, isometric mid-thigh pulling racks, exercise
testing bikes and treadmills, testing and monitoring device charging
stations, and associated computer equipment. Ensuring a consistent
location for exercise testing within the training facility is optimal for
ensuring the validity and reliability of exercise testing.
It is also important to consider safety in implementing technology
devices that are specifically designed for integration into free weight
and weightlifting areas. Such equipment includes rack-mounted
training feedback tablets, barbell attachments, linear position
transducers, accelerometers, and mounted camera systems. As a
general rule, weight room technology should be set up and
administered in a way that does not impede planned safety space
1754

(i.e., safety cushion) or interfere with the position of the spotters.
Additional considerations should be made for the placement of
clocks and television monitors that contain pertinent information to
ensure optimal visibility throughout the training session.
Aerobic Area
The aerobic area is where the cardiovascular training equipment is
grouped together. This equipment consists of stationary bicycles,
stair climbers, elliptical trainers, treadmills, rowers, and so on. A
general guideline is to allocate approximately 40 to 60 square feet
(3.7-5.6 m2) of floor space per piece of equipment (2). Specific floor
space requirements for aerobic equipment and the recommended
space between pieces of equipment are provided in table 25.1.
These requirements outline the amount of space needed for each
piece of equipment, along with the required amount of space to
allow for room to move and prevent accidents caused by falling into
equipment. Within aerobic training areas it is important that there is
adequate spacing around and behind all continuous-motion exercise
equipment (e.g., treadmills, elliptical trainers, bikes, ski trainers, and
rowers) (2).
TABLE 25.1 Aerobic Equipment Space Estimates
Equipment
Minimum space needed
Bike (upright)
30 ft2 (2.8 m2)
Bike (recumbent)
38 ft2 (3.5 m2)
Elliptical trainer
47 ft2 (4.4 m2)
Ski trainer
31 ft2 (2.9 m2)
Stair climber
35 ft2 (3.3 m2)
Rower
48 ft2 (4.5 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structural and Functional Considerations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standards for Accessible
Design (United States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
1755

Equipment
Minimum space needed
Treadmill
53 ft2 (4.9 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structural and Functional Considerations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standards for Accessible
Design (United States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
Indoor Sprint Track and Turf Lanes
Indoor track and turf lanes are beneficial for incorporating
plyometric, speed, and agility training. These surfaces also can be
used to implement warm-up and dynamic movement programs with
athletes. When track and turf lanes are incorporated within training
facilities, in proximity to other strength and conditioning equipment,
special considerations should be taken to enhance safety and reduce
the risk of injury and liability concerns.
Based on the specific needs and training goals, sideline, distance,
and running lane markings should be considered to optimize session
management and athlete instruction. Track and turf lanes should
remain clear of unnecessary equipment to avoid tripping and other
injury. Considering how many athletes will be using the turf and
track lanes simultaneously is essential to identifying space
requirements.
The length of track and turf lanes will determine the ability to
administer certain assessments. For example, a 20-meter (22 yd)
track lane would not be suitable to perform the Yo-Yo intermittent
recovery test due to the added 5 meters (5.5 yd) of length required
for jogging recovery between test intervals. Also, the amount of
space required at the ends of the track or turf lanes to allow for
deceleration is an important safety consideration. Determining the
amount of space needed to decelerate will depend on the
demographic and skill level of those being trained. While it is
common for padding to be installed on back-end walls to prevent
injury, it is best to avoid unnecessary collisions with an adequate
space allowance.
1756

Suspension Training Equipment
Suspension training equipment refers to commercially available ring,
handle, or strap setups (8). They are most often used for
bodyweight training focusing on upper body, lower body, and core.
The straps of a suspension training unit can be anchored
independent of each other (e.g., gymnastics ring) or connected by a
common anchor (e.g., eyelet and carabiner). Specific usage should
be in accordance with setup and loading guidelines determined by
the equipment manufacturer.
Safe and effective suspension training requires a stable
attachment point, level nonskid flooring, open space free of
obstacles, and handles that are easy to grip (e.g., not worn or
slippery) (8). Because suspension training equipment must be
attached to a fixed structure (e.g., load-bearing wall mount, bolted
rack, or rig frame), it is suggested that the strength and conditioning
professional regularly checks the integrity of the anchor point before
each use. Ideally, the anchor point should be between 7 to 9 feet
(2.1-2.7 m) above the floor. Further, suspension training equipment
should not be mounted in or near doorways to prevent blocking
emergency exits and hindering access to storage areas, cleaning
closets, locker rooms, and restrooms.
All accessories used to mount suspension training equipment
should be load bearing. As a general rule, any carabiner and snap
hook used for exercise purposes should be load-rated for physical
activity and include a secondary screw-locking mechanism to prevent
risks of falls or drops causing a potential injury. In the United States,
carabiners used for fall protection must meet OSHA standards, which
specify a minimum tensile (breaking) strength of 5,000 lbs (22kN)
(17). Outside of the United States, Conformité Européenne (CE) or
other third-party rating requirements should be referenced to select
connectors with appropriate load ratings for safety.
Table 25.2 summarizes the space needs for a range of exercise
types. Note that there are unique formulas that are specific to each
1757

type with several example calculations, including those based on
metric approximations.
TABLE 25.2 Calculations for Space Needs
Exercise
type
Examples of
exercises
Formulas and examples
Prone and
supine
exercises with
bar
Bench press;
lying triceps
extension;
hip thrust
Formula: DEPTH: actual weight bench lengtha (6-8 ft
[1.8-2.4 m]) + a safety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m) multiplied
by WIDTH: actual bar length (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1 m]) + a
double-wide safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1: If using a 6 ft long weight bench and a 7 ft
Olympic bar for the bench press exercise: DEPTH: (6 ft
[bench] + 3 ft [safety cushion]) × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6
ft [double-wide safety cushion]) = 117 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations): If using a 2 m
long weight bench and a 1 m long bar for the lying triceps
extension exercise: DEPTH: (2 m [bench] + 1 m [safety
cushion]) × WIDTH: (1 m [bar] + 2 m [double-wide safety
cushion]) = 9 m2
Standing
exercises
Biceps curl;
upright row
Formula: DEPTH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m)
for a standing exercise + a safety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar lengthb (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1
m]) + a double-wide safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1: If using a 4 ft curl bar for the biceps curl
exercise: DEPTH: (2 ft [user space] + 3 ft [safety
cushion]) × WIDTH: (4 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double-wide safety
cushion]) = 50 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations): If using a 2 m
bar for the upright row exercise: DEPTH: (1 m [user
space] + 1 m [safety cushion]) × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2
m [double-wide safety cushion]) = 8 m2
Standing
exercises
from a rack
Back squat;
shoulder
press
Formula: DEPTH: a suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-
3.0 m) for a standing exercise (from a rack) multiplied by
WIDTH: actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a double-
wide safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1: If using a 7 ft Olympic bar for the back squat
exercise: DEPTH: (10 ft [user space]) × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar]
1758

Exercise
type
Examples of
exercises
Formulas and examples
+ 6 ft [double-wide safety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations): If using a 2 m
Olympic bar for the shoulder press exercise: DEPTH: (3 m
[user space]) × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2 m [double-wide
safety cushion]) = 12 m2
Weightlifting
exercises
Power clean;
power snatch
Formula (on inlaid rubber flooring): DEPTH: a
suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-3.0 m) for a
weightlifting exercise multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar
length (6-7 ft [1.8-2.1 m]) + a double-wide safety cushion
of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Formula (on an elevated wood platform): DEPTH:
lifting platform length (typically 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a safety
cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m) multiplied by WIDTH: lifting
platform width (typically 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a double-wide
safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (on inlaid rubber flooring): DEPTH: (10 ft
[user space]) × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double-wide
safety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (on an elevated wood platform; metric
approximations):
DEPTH: (2.5 m [platform length] + 1 m [safety cushion])
× WIDTH: (2.5 m [platform width] + 2 m [double-wide
safety cushion]) ≈ 16 m2
Landmine
exercises
Landmine
squat; half-
kneeling
landmine
press
Formula: The minimum space need is based on the area
(A) of a circle (A = π × r2): The radius (r) of the circle is
comprised of the actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a
suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m) for a landmine
exercise + a safety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m). A minimum of
90 degrees of movement is required for the range of
motion at the user end of the bar for a landmine exercise;
90 degrees is one-quarter of a 360-degree circle. Thus, the
formula is (π × [actual bar length + user space + safety
cushion]2) divided by 4. (Use 3.14 for the value of π.)
Example 1: If using a 7 ft Olympic bar for the landmine
squat exercise: (π × [7 ft {bar} + 2 ft {user space} + 3 ft
{safety cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 113 ft2
1759

Exercise
type
Examples of
exercises
Formulas and examples
Example 2 (metric approximations): If using a 2 m
Olympic bar for the half-kneeling landmine press exercise:
(π × [2 m {bar} + 1 m {user space} + 1 m {safety
cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 12.5 m2
Suspension
training
exercises
Suspension
row; foot-
elevated
knee tuck
Formula: DEPTH: actual distance of the foot position (the
farthest foot position if the feet are staggered) from the
anchor point of the suspension strap (measure out from a
spot on the ground directly under the anchor point) + the
athlete’s height + a safety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WIDTH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6
m) for a suspension exercise + a double-wide safety
cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (angled use): If a 6 ft tall athlete is doing an
angled suspension exercise (e.g., a suspension row) with
both feet positioned 3 ft from the suspension strap anchor
point: DEPTH: (3 ft [distance out from under the anchor
point] + 6 ft [athlete’s height] + 3 ft [perimeter walkway
safety cushion]) × WIDTH: (2 ft [user space] + 6 ft [safety
cushion]) = 96 ft2
Example 2 (vertical or perpendicular use; metric
approximations): If a 1.6 m tall athlete is doing a prone
suspension exercise (e.g., a foot-elevated knee tuck) with
the feet in the straps directly below the anchor point:
DEPTH: (0 m [distance out from under the anchor point] +
1.6 m [athlete height] + 1 m [safety cushion]) × WIDTH:
(1 m [user space] + 2 m [safety cushion]) ≈ 8 m2
aFor prone and supine ground-based barbell exercises with no bench, use the athlete’s
height for the DEPTH.
bFor dumbbell and kettlebell exercises (i.e., standing exercises without a bar), use a user
space of 2 ft (0.6 m) for the WIDTH.
Organizing a facility begins with arranging the equipment in a
safe, functional space. The guidelines in this chapter provide the
tools necessary to properly arrange the equipment. Taking a blank
floor plan of the facility and sketching the equipment arrangement
on the blank plan will help with equipment placement. Figures 25.3
and 25.4 on pages 812 and 813, respectively, show examples of
1760

weight room floor plans for secondary school and university settings.
Notice the walkway spacing and arrangement, as well as the
organization and grouping of the equipment. Also note the
placement of the supervisor’s office, window placement, and storage
areas.
1761

Maintaining and Cleaning Surfaces and
Equipment
Surfaces in the strength and conditioning facility should be cleaned,
sanitized, and disinfected consistently to ensure that the equipment
is safe and functional. Proper maintenance will reduce cost in the
long run, because cleaning supplies are cheaper than replacing
padding, flooring, exercise mats, and so on. Microbes will begin to
grow if the surfaces are not wiped down with a germicidal cleaner.
Equipment and surfaces that are used more often and have a
greater chance of developing bacterial growth (e.g., padding and
vinyl), should be cleaned daily or every other day. It is important
that any germicidal cleaner used in the strength facility have the
ability to prevent the spread of germs, including bacteria, viruses,
parasites, and fungi, and illness, such as the flu, COVID-19, HIV,
hepatitis, and ringworm (or other infectious rashes). After cleaning
surfaces and equipment to remove any dirt and debris, the CDC
recommends sanitizing and disinfecting surfaces with an EPA-
registered disinfecting product to eliminate and inactivate germs to
reduce the spread of illness (20). For laundry items, such as cleaning
rags and gym towels, use detergent and the hottest available water
setting, and dry items completely.
Nonabsorbent floors should be regularly mopped for removal of
dust and grime buildup. Wood weightlifting platforms should also be
checked for splintering and cracking and cleaned with an appropriate
cleaner to remove dust and dirt that could cause foot slippage.
When cleaning around racks and machinery, the bolts and screws
that hold the equipment to the floor should also be tightened or
checked regularly (4). Machines that have cables and pulleys should
be regularly checked and should be repaired if the cables and pulleys
are loose or fraying. If the facility has a tiled or rolled rubber floor,
minimal gaps should appear between the pieces and no visible glue
1762

should extrude between the cracks. Carpet should be vacuumed and
cleaned regularly to prevent mold, mildew, or fungal growth.
Walls and ceilings should also be cleaned at least once every
week or two. The walls and ceilings should have no dirt buildup, and
there should not be any dust in the corners. Dust and cobwebs tend
to build up high in the corners where the walls meet the ceiling and
should be removed. If the facility has windows and mirrors, they
should be regularly checked for cracking and replaced as soon as a
crack is noticed. Clean windows and mirrors also enhance the
appearance of the facility. Use a window cleaner and microfiber
towel to leave the surface streak free. Dirt and dust can build up on
flat edges of items affixed to the wall or fixtures hanging from the
ceiling. Any windowsills, shelves, or anything hanging from the
ceiling should be dusted regularly. If exercise equipment is hanging
from the ceiling, it should be regularly checked to ensure that it is
tightly secured and will not fall down (4). Figure 25.5 on page 814
presents a list to refer to when creating a cleaning schedule for the
floors, walls, and ceilings.
Scheduling frequent maintenance and cleaning ensures
safety, 
protects 
equipment, 
and 
maintains 
the
appearance of the strength and conditioning facility.
Maintenance should include not only the surface materials but
also the equipment. The equipment should be regularly checked for
broken or damaged parts, particularly those that affect functionality.
If the equipment is used often and not cleaned enough, residue can
build up that may cause functional or health issues. Nonfunctional
equipment should be labeled with an “Out of Order” sign (2). If
there is a delay before fixing broken equipment, it should be
removed from the floor and placed in storage. As with surfaces,
equipment repairs can end up costing more if it is not maintained
and cleaned properly. Malfunctioning equipment also increases the
1763

risk of legal liability to strength and conditioning professionals and
institutions (16).
The NSCA’s safety checklist for exercise facility and equipment
maintenance (figure 25.6; pages 815-817) is helpful for determining
the maintenance needs of exercise equipment. A cleaning schedule
should be made that specifies the equipment to be cleaned daily,
weekly, biweekly, or monthly. The checklist also covers facility layout
issues, especially those relating to safety.
Cleaning and maintenance materials should be kept in a locked
storage closet for use when needed. Any hazardous cleaning
products and chemicals should be clearly labeled and only accessible
to adults. Any tools should be stored in a toolbox that is put away
and out of sight of the weight room. Tools and cleaning materials
should also be regularly inventoried and restocked. A list of
maintenance equipment and cleaning supplies is provided in table
25.3.
TABLE 25.3 Equipment and Supplies for
Maintenance and Cleaning
Maintenance equipment
Cleaning supplies
File
Hammer
Pliers
Screwdriver set
Allen wrench set
Adjustable wrench set
Knife, heavy-duty scissors, and/or
box cutter
Stapler
Duct tape
Extra nuts, bolts, and washers
Heavy-duty glue
Drill and drill bit set
Vise grips
Adjustable ladder or step stool
Disinfectant (germicide)
Specialty cleaners (e.g., wood, walls, upholstery)
Glass cleaner
Lubrication
Paper towels
Spray bottles
Cloth towels and rags
Sponges
Brooms and dustpans
Vacuum cleaner and/or wet vacuum cleaner
Mop and bucket
Stain remover
Wire brush
Cleaning extension poles (for out-of-reach ceilings,
mirrors, and walls)
1764

Conclusion
Designing a strength and conditioning facility is an extensive process
that involves a significant amount of planning. The process begins
with the formation of a committee that will contribute to the design
and construction of the facility. The next step involves assessing the
specific needs of the strength and conditioning department. This is
the phase in which the number and experience level of athletes
being 
trained, 
preferences 
from 
strength 
and 
conditioning
professionals and staff, scheduling, and equipment needs should be
determined. After these determinations have been made, the
process of designing the facility and arranging the equipment can
begin. Care should be taken and guidelines followed in arranging
and spacing equipment to optimize safety, function, and traffic flow.
After the design process is complete, the facility and the
equipment must be properly maintained and cared for to ensure safe
training and protect financial investments. Regular maintenance and
cleaning of equipment and surfaces are vital for the longevity of the
facility, in addition to health and safety. Cleaning and maintenance
should focus the most on high-traffic areas and equipment that is
used more often. This will help to prevent the spread of infections
and disease among the facility users as well as promote proper
hygiene and maintain the appearance of the environment. It is also
suggested that once the facility is operational, key stakeholders meet
periodically to discuss outcomes and plans for future changes (9).
KEY TERMS
construction phase
design phase
feasibility study
master plan
minimally compliant facility
needs analysis
1765

predesign phase
preoperation phase
safety cushion
SWOT analysis
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  What is considered the optimal temperature range for a
strength and conditioning facility?
  a.  58 °F to 64 °F (14-18 °C)
  b.  64 °F to 68 °F (18-20 °C)
  c.  68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C)
  d.  74 °F to 78 °F (23-26 °C)
  2.  What is the minimum recommended amount of space per
person within a strength and conditioning facility?
  a.  70 square feet (6.5 m2)
  b.  100 square feet (9.3 m2)
  c.  130 square feet (12.1 m2)
  d.  144 square feet (13.4 m2)
  3.  What is the minimum recommended spacing on each side of a
power rack?
  a.  3 ft (0.9 m)
  b.  4 ft (1.2 m)
  c.  6 ft (1.8 m)
  d.  7 ft (2.1 m)
  4.  What is the recommended width for designated walkways in a
strength and conditioning facility?
  a.  2 to 3 feet (0.6-0.9 m)
  b.  3 to 5 feet (0.9-1.5 m)
  c.  5 to 7 feet (1.5-2.1 m)
  d.  >7 feet (>2.1 m)
  5.  What is an important consideration for safely using suspension
trainers?
1766

  a.  Regularly check that all suspension anchors, accessories,
and attachments are properly secured for use with
consideration of the load-bearing nature of the exercise.
  b.  Finding a reinforced doorway to secure suspension
training devices is best to optimize movement throughout
a strength and conditioning facility.
  c.  Single-lock carabiners must be used to attach suspension
trainers to anchor points.
  d.  Safety cushion spacing does not apply to suspension
trainers.
1767

FIGURE 25.3 Example of a secondary school strength and conditioning facility floor plan
(3 ft = 0.9 m).
1768

FIGURE 25.4 Example of a university strength and conditioning facility floor plan (3 ft =
0.9 m).
1769

Figure 25.5  Checklist for cleaning floors, walls,
ceilings, and surfaces.
Floors
Check floors for dirt, grime, and chalk buildup.
Nonabsorbent floors should be regularly swept and mopped.
Check carpet for any moisture, mold, mildew, or fungal growth.
Carpet should be vacuumed and cleaned regularly.
Walls
Check walls for dirt and dust buildup.
Dust and clean walls at least once every week or two.
Clean mirrors and windows of smudges at least once per week.
Ceilings
Ceilings and ceiling fixtures should be dusted or cleaned at least once every
week or two.
Open ceilings with exposed pipes and ducts should be cleaned as needed.
Check for dust and cobweb buildup (especially near corners and HVAC
vents).
Surfaces
Dust windowsills and shelving surfaces at least once per week.
Exercise surfaces, mats, and pads that contact skin should be cleaned daily
with germicidal cleaner.
Clean and sanitize hydration and nutrition spaces (drinking fountains, water
bottle refill stations, countertops) daily and additionally as needed.
From National Strength and Conditioning Association, Essentials of Strength
Training and Conditioning, 5th ed., edited by G.G. Haff and N.T. Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
Figure 25.6  NSCA’s safety checklist for exercise
facility and equipment maintenance.
Exercise Facility
Flooring and Turf Areas
1770

Wooden platforms should be free of splinters, cracks, holes, protruding nails,
loose screws, and warping.
Tighten bolts and screws and ensure they are secure in attaching equipment
to the floor.
Tile flooring should be resistant to slipping; no moisture or chalk
accumulation should appear.
Rubber flooring should be slip resistant and free of cuts, slits, and gaps
between pieces.
Interlocking mats are secure and arranged with no protruding tabs.
Carpet should be free of tears; any worn areas should be protected by mats.
Flooring and turf are glued or fastened down properly.
Walls
Walls in high-activity areas are free of protruding appliances, equipment, or
wall hangings.
Mirrors and shelves are securely fixed to walls.
Mirrors are placed a minimum of 20 inches (51 cm) off the floor in all areas.
Mirrors and windows are not cracked, broken, or distorted (replace
immediately if damaged).
Bolts and screws are tightened and secure in attaching any balance railing to
the walls.
Wall hooks and suspension anchors are secure for use with attachments.
Ceiling
Ceiling fans, HVAC, and air exchange systems work properly.
Lighting is designed to optimize visibility at floor level.
Ceiling height is sufficient for overhead exercises (12 ft [3.7 m] minimum)
and free of low-hanging apparatus (e.g., beams, pipes, lighting, signs).
Ceiling fixtures and attachments are secure, preventing the risk of falling
objects.
Any damaged or missing ceiling tiles are replaced as soon as possible.
Exercise Equipment
Stretching and Bodyweight Exercise Area
Mat area is free of weight benches and equipment.
Mats and bench upholstery are free of cracks and tears.
Equipment is properly stored after use.
Elastic bands are secured to their base and checked for wear.
1771

Nonslip material appears on the top surface and bottom or base of
plyometric boxes.
Resistance Training Machine Area
Each station is easily accessed (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Area is free of loose bolts, screws, cables, and chains.
Proper selectorized pins are used and there is adequate storage or hanging
space for equipment accessories.
Securing straps and locking mechanisms must be functional.
Functional parts are properly lubricated.
Protective padding is free of cracks and tears.
No protruding screws or parts need tightening or removed.
Belts, chains, and cables are aligned with machine parts.
No worn parts (e.g., frayed cable, loose chains, worn bolts, cracked joints)
exist.
Resistance Training Free Weight Area
Each bench or area is easily accessible (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] access
clearance; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 inches [91 cm])
between ends.
Dumbbell racks and other equipment are placed at least 6 inches (15 cm)
away from mirrors.
All equipment is returned after use to avoid obstruction of pathway.
Safety equipment (e.g., belts, collars, safety bars) is used and returned.
Protective padding is free of cracks and tears.
Bolts and apparatus parts (e.g., collars and attachments) are secure and
tightly fastened.
Olympic bars turn properly and are properly lubricated and tightened.
Benches, weight racks, standards, and similar equipment are secured to the
floor or wall.
Nonfunctional or broken equipment is removed from the area or labeled with
an “out of service” sign.
Weightlifting Area
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 in. [91 cm]) between
ends.
All equipment is returned after use to avoid obstruction of lifting area.
Olympic bars turn properly and are properly lubricated and tightened.
1772

Bent or rusted Olympic bars are replaced; knurling is brushed and clear of
debris.
Collars are functional.
Bumper plates are inspected regularly; bumper plates should be free of
cracks and any loose bolts.
Sufficient grip chalk is available.
Wrist straps, belts, and knee wraps are available, functional, and stored
properly.
Benches, chairs, and boxes are kept at a distance from weightlifting area.
Aerobic Exercise and Exercise Testing Areas
Each station is easily accessible (minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Bolts and screws are secure and tightened.
Functioning parts are easily adjustable.
Parts and surfaces are properly lubricated and cleaned.
Foot and body straps are secure and not ripped.
Recalibration and regular technology device maintenance are performed.
Measurement devices are properly functioning.
Power cords do not extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter areas.
Frequency of Maintenance and Cleaning Tasks
Daily
Inspect all flooring and wooden platforms for damage or wear.
Clean (sweep, vacuum, or mop and disinfect) all flooring.
Inspect upholstery for damage or wear.
Clean and disinfect upholstery.
Clean and disinfect hydration and nutrition areas.
Inspect fixed equipment’s connection with floor, walls, or ceiling.
Clean and disinfect equipment surfaces that contact skin.
Inspect mirrors and windows for damage.
Clean mirrors and windows of smudges.
Inspect that wall hooks and suspension anchors are secure for use with
attachments.
Inspect all equipment for damage; wear; fraying; loose or protruding belts,
screws, cables, or chains; insecure or nonfunctioning foot and body straps;
improper functioning or improper use of attachments, pins, or other devices.
1773

Inspect all protective padding for cracks and tears.
Inspect nonslip material and mats for proper placement, damage, and wear.
Clean and sanitize exercise mats.
Remove trash and garbage.
Ensure equipment is returned and stored properly after use.
Two or Three Times Per Week
Clean and lubricate all moving parts of equipment and aerobic machines.
Clean and lubricate the guide rods on selectorized resistance training
machines.
Ensure Olympic bars turn properly and are properly lubricated and tightened.
Once Per Week or Two
Clean and dust ceiling fixtures and attachments.
Clean ceiling tiles.
Clean walls.
Clean light covers, fans, air vents, clocks, and speakers.
As Needed
Replace light bulbs.
Replace damaged or missing ceiling tiles.
Clean open ceilings with exposed pipes or ducts.
Remove or place “out of order” sign on broken equipment.
Fill chalk boxes.
Clean bar knurling.
Remove rust from floor, plates, bars, and equipment with a rust-removing
solution.
Wash and sanitize rags and gym towels per use.
From National Strength and Conditioning Association, Essentials of Strength
Training and Conditioning, 5th ed., edited by G.G. Haff and N.T. Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
1774
